One of today's most important challenges 
is the decarbonisation of the economy.  

This will require huge changes in 
little more than a single generation  

and will demand innovative 
solutions technologies and policies.  

Hydrogen will play a crucial role in making 
this fundamental change to our energy systems.  

A globalized hydrogen economy could play a 
major role in preventing the climate emergency  

from becoming a catastrophic 
reality for the next generations.

Hydrogen, It's light, It's energy dense, 
It's storable and it produces no direct  

greenhouse gas emissions, which, of course, is 
why it is attracting enormous interest on the part  

of governments and business. Does the balance of 
opportunities and challenges justify all the high  

hopes? Our title is at the dawn of the hydrogen 
academy, and we have brought together a fantastic  

international panel, representing countries with 
biggest hydrogen ambitions. In just a moment,  

I will welcome our speakers, but I would 
like to get your take on our audience poll,  

which is will hydrogen become the 
bulk energy carrier of the future?  

And the voting as begun. As you can see, the yeses 
are definitely in the majority, but we want to  

keep those votes coming in for a while, ladies 
and gentlemen, so if you're a registered user,  

please go to the Slido window there on your screen 
on this stream and let us know what you think.  

Will hydrogen become the bulk energy carrier of 
the future? And now it is my pleasure to introduce  

our great international panel, and then we'll 
come back to that graphic that we have for you.  

And I'm just going to, as always, keep the 
introductions really brief to try to maximize our  

time for discussion. So, we begin with Juan Carlos 
Jobet, the Energy Minister for Chile, set itself  

to be one of the world's leading exporters of 
hydrogen by 2030. Great to have you, sir. Colombia  

is joining forces with Chile and ratcheting up its 
own goals. We're very pleased to have Diego Mesa,  

Minister of Mines And Energy. Also very pleased 
to welcome Dan J rgensen. He is Minister for  

Climate Energy and Utilities for Denmark. 
Europe'S largest green hydrogen facility  

is planned for the Danish North Sea coast. 
Also, very, very pleased to be joined by  

Jo o Galamba, Deputy Minister and Secretary 
of State for Energy from Portugal, which plans  

to start producing green hydrogen by the end 
of next year with also the aim of becoming a  

major energy exporter. And finally, Kersti 
Berge is with us. She is Director For Energy  

in the Scottish government. Scotland is putting 
massive resources into the strategy we'll see  

it generate 5 gigawatts of hydrogen by 2030, 
and already hundreds of Scottish homes are  

going to be the first in the world to use entirely 
green hydrogen for heating and cooking. So as I  

said, all of our speakers with big ambitions 
in the new hydrogen economy. We'll hear more  

after we take another look at that audience poll 
that we had there. And the voting seems to have  

stopped, and in fact, a good 2/3 of those who 
answered said hydrogen will, indeed, become  

the bulk energy carrier of the future. And a 
little bit later on, we're going to do a second  

poll with our audience, but, first of all, let 
me ask all of our panelists to get us started  

with your headlines only version of hydrogen's 
main advantages but also the challenges. And I  

say headline only because, as always, in lieu of 
our very tight schedule, we are looking for about  

two minutes per speaker for this first round. So, 
I will begin, if I may, with Juan Carlos Jobet.

Well, thank you very much for the opportunity. And 
the results of the poll, I tend to agree with your  

results. In Chile, we have enormous renewable 
energy potential, so we're working aggressively  

to develop green hydrogen. The use of renewable 
energy, naturally produced with the sun and the  

wind to be a leading exporter of green hydrogen 
to the world and also to achieve our own carbon  

neutrality goals. So the two main opportunities, I 
would say. First is to decarbonize sectors of the  

economy that are hard to electrify, right? We're 
going to use cleaner electricity in many areas,  

but there are other areas we need other solutions. 
For example, steel, cement, and also heavy  

transportation. Right? The first opportunity. 
Green hydrogen will contribute possibly 25%  

of CO2 reductions. And I think the second 
opportunity for us is to take advantage of  

our enormous resources through hydrogen. 
Other countries goals and also to develop  

infrastructure, create jobs, and have the recovery 
in areas of our country that have the natural  

resources but don't have necessarily thriving 
economies today. And the two main challenges.  

First one is to avoid partial solutions. We really 
need to make sure that the change of production  

from the generation to the end consumer it's 
really green. Right we don't want our people  

to ?? we want to make sure we make sure it 
makes a contribution we expect it to make.  

And the second challenge is we need to reduce the 
cost of producing and exporting green hydrogen and  

we need to scale up production and accelerate the 
process of developing new technologies of storage  

and then to move it around. So I think those are 
the two ways of dealing with the main challenge. 

Thank you very much. We will certainly return 
to some of those points a little bit later on.  

Ladies and gentlemen, before I move to our 
next speaker, may I remind you we would be  

very eager to hear your questions to our panel. 
All registered users can send us questions via  

the chat function on our livestream, so 
please do that. I'll go now to Minister  

Mesa also for that headline version of the biggest 
opportunities but also the biggest challenges. 

Thank you. It's a pleasure to be on this panel. 
So, talking about opportunities, I think the great  

opportunities arguably are for climate change 
and to achieve that goal to get to Net Zero  

by 2050. From a country such as Colombia that is 
a middle-income country, the biggest opportunities  

arise from our natural endowment that are needed 
to produce green hydrogen. This is a country that  

is extremely rich in water resources. We're the 
fifth country with the largest renewable water  

resources in the world. We also have significant 
potential to produce energy from solar and wind,  

and we are developing these technologies very 
quickly. We're growing from less than 1% of our  

power matrix made up of solar and wind to more 
than 12% in just a four?year period. And so I  

think there is a great opportunity for countries 
like Colombia to become exporters of clean energy. 

Thank you.
And I think for the challenges,  

the challenges are mostly on capital investment, 
infrastructure and logistics to be able to  

distribute this clean source of energy which 
could be used for different applications. Storage,  

transportation, obviously in the industrial 
sector. So we need to make sure that we reconvert  

some of the infrastructure abilities in many 
countries to be able to have trade in hydrogen,  

in green hydrogen that's able to reach specially 
industrialized countries around the world. 

Thank you. Thank you very much for that. I'll 
move along now to minister Jorgensen from Denmark.  

Again, please, that headline version, 
challenges and opportunities. 

Thank you so much I'll start with 
the positive side, the opportunities.  

Basically there are two of them. One is that we 
will have the possibility to use renewables as  

part of our energy systems where it's not possible 
today. That's maritime transport, aviation, heavy  

road transport. It sounds almost like science 
fiction. Today it is just science. We can take  

the energy from the wind, harvest the energy from 
the wind make it into hydrogen add some carbon and  

fly a plane from e-fuel out of that.
That's extraordinary. Second big thing is  

that with wind, for instance, and also other types 
of renewables, we are dependent on the weather. So  

we need weather storing the energy. 
And hydrogen is exactly that  

possibility. Now, on the challenges. Basically, 
it's already been said. We need more scale. So we  

need green technology development. This will also 
bring down costs. And also that the energy loss in  

the transformation through hydrogen and hydrogen 
to other fuels and still too big. So when we bring  

that down, costs will also go down and the scale 
will go up. So it's all interconnected. Thank you. 

Thank you very much. You mentioned 
those transport sectors. In fact, if I'm  

not incorrect, I believe that you are 
planning what will be the world's largest  

hydrogen powered ferry, is that correct? Yeah.
Yes, actually we have a big Danish maritime  

conglomerate. It is now part of a collaboration 
that will help create new fuels based on PGX  

that can serve global. It's also working 
together with the SAS, the Danish aviation  

company, and actually the biggest, the largest 
project we have now will be making fertilizer  

for the agriculture sector. We planned a project 
that will save the planet from 1.5 million tons of  

CO2 every year by making ammonia via PGX.
Thank you for that addition. Let me go to Deputy  

Minister Galamba for the same question as to the 
chalenges and opportunities. can you hear us?  

He's frozen. We will go to Scotland and come 
back to Portugal. Let me go then to Kersti Berge,  

again with that same question, 
challenges, opportunities, how you see it. 

Thank you very much. Can I make 
sure you hear me all right? 

Absolutely.
Hydrogen transition is very important  

part of our goal for Net Zero. It's a 
very important part of our green recovery  

and from the crisis that COVID has caused. 
Scotland's vision for hydrogen is unashamedly  

ambitious, and that ambition will need all of 
us here today to work together to realize it.  

We set out our hydrogen policy statement 
just before Christmas, and in that we were  

clear we wanted Scotland to become a hydrogen 
nation. And strong international partners in the  

production of sustainable hydrogen. So our aim is 
to generate 5 gigawatts capacity of renewable and  

low?carbon hydrogen by 2030, which is an ambitious 
target. Supported by our stunning track record of  

hydrogen demonstration projects and maximizing the 
opportunities presented by our extensive natural  

resources, our existing infrastructure 
in Scotland and our skilled workforce,  

our intention is for Scotland to become a producer 
of the lowest cost hydrogen in Europe by 2025.  

Scotland's no longer a member of the European 
Union. We an keen and ready to work with EU  

partners as well as others to overcome some of 
the challenges of safe, rapid and cost?effective  

deployment that I know other ministers have spoken 
about. Scotland has the potential to produce,  

firstly, large?scale blue hydrogen. More 
significantly, internationally, green hydrogen  

for onshore and offshore. In Scotland, we have 25% 
of Europe's offshore wind resource and we've got  

the largest seascape for development. It's 
a huge potential for green hydrogen today.  

And as we work together, one of the challenges for 
all of us will be to improve our understanding of  

the global nature and supply and demand for 
hydrogen. Some perspective, we're very well  

placed in terms of proximity and infrastructure 
connectivity to a number of other European nations  

and would be able to produce efficient 
hydrogen for their own decarbonization.  

The last thing I wanted to say, and I have to 
say that because I'm sitting here in Glasgow,  

is that later this year Glasgow will, of course, 
host COP26 UN conference, the most significant  

climate change conference since the Paris Climate 
Conference four years ago. Work towards our Net  

Zero ambitions and also work collectively on 
the huge opportunity hydrogen provides us. 

Thank you very much for that. And exciting to be 
there in the Glasgow in the run?up to COP26. Let  

me go back to Deputy minister Galamba. Headline 
view and then we're going to dig a little deeper. 

Well, the opportunities have already been 
mentioned. We believe that the renewables  

present us all with an opportunity to go deeper 
in terms of decarbonization and green hydrogen  

for Portugal strategy is a perfect compliment to 
our main strategy. We want to leverage our very  

competitive resources. Portugal is blessed with 
a huge solar resource and wind resource also.  

So the two combined will give Portugal a 
significant edge in terms of its competitiveness  

in renewables in general and in hydrogen in 
particular. We've already changed Portuguese  

legal and legislative framework to enter our 
energy system. We've already changed the law  

to allow the guarantees of origin, initially only 
for electricity, to broaden into renewable gases,  

and we are currently in Portugal preparing our 
first hydrogen option to support end users.  

We will do an option, carbon CFD, that will 
basically pay the difference between existing  

carbon prices in international markets and 
that theoretical carbon price that will  

make hydrogen users in whatever form commercially 
viable. So we are preparing it, and we want to  

launch our first hydrogen to provide support 
to decarbonization transportation this year.  

So in Portugal, we believe we have the right 
framework at the moment to kick start this.  

We have the legal and regulatory frameworks. 
We have the instruments to provide support  

for investment and we are currently developing to 
support users who want to switch to hydrogen. The  

challenges. The challenges I believe one that 
was already mentioned, one of the challenges is  

scaling up. There are huge advantages in terms of 
costs, which are the main barrier to adoption of  

the green hydrogen, are costs. So scaling up is 
crucial, but we believe that the main challenge  

is collaboration. We are here on the panel 
with Chile, Colombia and Denmark, Scotland  

and Portugal. And the opportunity for hydrogen is 
so vast that we actually are not competing against  

each other. We must collaborate because either 
we succeed collectively or we fail individually.  

This is a very complex market that has to be 
tackles simultaneously from the supply side,  

and that can only be done nationally through 
strong collaboration, but mainly international  

through strong collaboration and partnerships 
between governments, international institutions,  

across all partnerships around specific 
projects. We believe that this is the main  

challenge. To look at an area that has been 
competitive from the start and look at it  

more from the angle of collaboration. So, this 
is, from our perspective, the main challenge,  

but we believe that we have the conditions 
to tackle it and to overcome it. Thank you. 

Thank you very much. And, in fact, when I 
was researching this panel, I did encounter a  

number of collaborations just amongst yourselves. 
Chile and Colombia as I mentioned at the outset,  

but also Denmark, I believe I mentioned you're 
collaborating with Norway, if I'm not mistaken.  

So clearly a lot going on in that space. I'd like 
to drill deeper on a few of the challenges you  

have all mentioned, and also some of them being 
brought up in the ?? by the audience in questions.  

So, I'm just going to put a few things out 
there. And whoever wants to speak to it,  

just give me a hand signal, if you would. That 
way we get to make this last panel a bit more  

interactive, even though we're virtual. 
So, one of the things that is often said  

is that the development of infrastructure has 
to proceed much more quickly than it is doing  

right now. And I have an audience question 
that's come in that says, large?scale storage  

of green hydrogen must be addressed so its 
production and usage timelines are not aligned.  

How do you solve this? Large?scale 
storage, who would like to speak to that?  

Nobody? No takers. Okay, please, 
Deputy Minister, please take it away. 

Yes, we are currently addressing that specific 
challenge in terms of injection because the  

production ?? the injection cannot be designed. 
You have to have a permanent flow. The way we are  

addressing is trying to socialize the investment 
cost necessary for storage. So, joining several  

projects and ensuring that the storage investments 
are shared. Also, Portugal has salt caverns  

used to store natural gas. We plan it in our 
law to evolve gradually. It will not be a sudden  

switch, but we've included those assets as 
part of our natural gas system that will  

gradually evolve to store green hydrogen. That's 
the approach that we are taking at the moment. 

Thank you very much. Another question that comes 
up frequently is the question of standards.  

Because, of course, green hydrogen is only as 
green as the power source that it used to make  

it. So, some one of you or a couple of you 
did mention the need for standards. The see  

Minister Jorgensen raising his hand. I also 
see Minister ?? I'm sorry, Jobet, I'm probably  

not saying your name correctly. 
We'll go to Minister Jorgensen.  

I think you're on mute again, dear sir.
I think that is an important question. It's  

also, unfortunately, something that the European 
Union will be dealing with in the near future. The  

UN commission, as you probably know, has stated 
that they will form a package later this year. How  

do we achieve the 55% reduction in 2030 that we 
decided? How do we facilitate the transformation  

to a hydrogen economy? How do we define the 
different types? What types are we then willing  

to subsidize? Which should we maybe not subsidize 
so much? I think that is a very safe step. 

Thank you very much. Can I just ask you ?? 
you say within Europe, but do we actually need  

international standards on this to ensure 
some kind of a level playing field? 

Well, in the perfect world, we would have 
international standards. In the perfect world,  

we would have a global carbon tax or 
some other kind of pricing mechanism.  

I'm a little bit hesitant to recommend that 
because I don't think it's feasible to achieve  

that within the next couple of years. Which is 
when we need it. So maybe it's a good idea if we  

try and set standards in Europe. Other countries 
can collaborate in their regions to do the same,  

and then hopefully ?? and then later maybe we 
can see whether or not we can make that happen. 

Thank you very much. We'll go to Chile and then 
Colombia. I see Portugal would like to weigh in  

as well. First of all, to you, Minister Jobet, 
would you tell me one time to say your name so  

I say it right? Oh, okay. That makes it 
easy. That makes it easier. Thank you. 

So basically I think international standards, 
right? The more common standards we have,  

the faster we can development this 
industry. And the faster we get evolve  

technology that is developed in one location to 
be used in different locations. As it was said,  

standards all over the world. So I think this is 
an area in which international cooperation can  

play a key role. We are a small production. 
What bigger productions are working on ??

It's important to accelerate this 
technology in different countries. 

Thank you very much. And I'll move 
over to Minister Mesa from Colombia. 

Thank you. I fully agree on the need to 
collaborate in order to have international  

standards that become the norm. And I think 
one of the first issues we need to tackle is  

the so?called certificate for big hydrogen. As you 
said, green hydrogen, the color of the hydrogen  

will depend on how green or how clean your power 
matrix is. And I think here we need to make sure  

that we can trade hydrogen, that we can establish 
all the links in the chain to be sure that it's  

green, and we need also to track CO2 emissions 
for the production of hydrogen use. This will  

help us internationally have an agreement. That's 
why I think countries like Colombia and Chile  

in which we're working towards a cleaner energy 
system could take advantage. In Colombia,  

for example, we have more than 70% of our power 
matrix that is clean, because we depend heavily  

on hydro generation, and with the incorporation of 
renewable energy we're getting closer to 90 or 80%  

of our matrix. Is key and we have to collaborate 
to develop those standards along those lines 

Thank you very much. Let me go now to Portugal.
If you care to speak to it, I would be very  

interested to know who can drive this standard 
setting? How ?? do you do we make that happen? 

Well, willing nations that have an interest in 
developing this market. But I have to say that,  

yeah, we have to work with what we have. Following 
the Danish Minister. What Portugal has done in its  

law regarding guarantees of origin. It's basically 
to use the certification that is currently being  

developed by a joint venture between the industry 
and the European commission. The fuel cell  

hydrogen that they're taking because the standard 
that is available, it is a European standard still  

being developed. And that's what we used because 
that's what we have, but we are, of course,  

very committed to working with other countries to 
work ?? towards international standards, but first  

we start with what we have, which is the beginning 
of certification. That's what we have. That's what  

we used. Because we wanted to have something in 
the Portuguese law that we could start working  

with. Yes, we are fully committed to working with 
international organizations and coming to the  

countries to work together on 
this. But I agree with the Minister  

that it's difficult to establish international 
standards at such an early age. That's why we  

started with the certification that 
we had, which was a European one. 

Thank you very much. And now also over to Kersti 
Berge who also wanted to speak to this point. 

It's a hugely important point. Development of 
hydrogen relies on global markets. For example,  

wind production was put for standardized 
consumption. Absolutely critical to ensure  

a market for hydrogen developers. So with that 
in mind, Scotland's position is I think also,  

you know, let's work with what we 
have, but there's no reason why,  

you know, an approach an EU approach 
to standardization can't progress,  

but there is a risk, you know, if you 
wait for too long for the perfect system,  

it's not going to arrive in time and not be 
what we need for the Net Zero transition. 

Can I just ask whether new technologies offer 
some promising solutions along the issue of  

guarantee of origin and tracing? Because, of 
course, we often hear that is well suited to  

such. Anybody have a few about technology's role 
in all of this? Okay. Not off?hand. That's fine. I  

have another question that I'm happy to answer.
We've included block chain in the energy  

communities, but not yet in certification. 
We will include peer-to-peer mechanisms  

regarding energy communities and self-consumption, 
but not yet determination of an average. 

Thank you. I'd like to move on to perhaps not a 
challenge, but often something discussed in the  

hydrogen community as an essential step that needs 
to be taken. Mainly moving the use of hydrogen  

into sectors where it hasn't been employed here 
to for. A couple of you have mentioned that.  

What would you say are crucial aspects of 
that. Shipping, heating. Mentioned Scottish  

homes are going to be using this for cooking. 
Minister Jorgensen, I see you raised your hand.  

I'm going to ask Minister Jorgensen to 
start and then I'll come to you, thanks. 

I think there are some differences. One is there 
is no subsidy which I think we need. So much  

research and development, science community and 
the private sector. And now of course we shouldn't  

make the same mistakes as was done decades ago in 
the fossil fuel segment. Becoming so dependent on  

subsidies that it became difficult to keep 
up with people. But that is side, we need to  

acknowledge that we need subsidies. Second thing 
that I think is really important is immigration.  

We need to put away the different challenges 
that are there now, the red tape that are there  

now which basically has been necessary for a 
different type of economy. For one example,  

for some of these issues you need to add carbon 
to the hydrogen. So, that needs to be changed. So,  

there are so many things you need to do is 
first we need to put a price on pollution.  

If we put a higher price on carbon production 
the final technologies look very much different. 

Very much. Thank you. Kersti 
Berge, I'll come to you. 

I very much agree with the Minister. It's very 
interesting to hear from Portugal that they're  

already putting in mechanisms. We have been 
very successful and the UK of using mechanisms  

for wind deployment so a 10?year?old can 
play. We've got work to do on demonstration,  

and then quickly moving from demonstration to 
employment. You mentioned opportunities for  

hydrogen in heat. So in Scotland, about 80% to 
90% of our domestic housing is heated by gas. We  

see high opportunities to use hydrogen as heat as 
well as other processes in Scotland. We've got a  

project we are testing, hydrogen supply to about 
300 households and 5 in Scotland. Doing so that  

we can actually understand what's been done and 
put into context what's been recorded as well. 

Thank you very much. I believe 
Minister Jobet wanted to add a word. 

Yeah, very quick. If you want to use hydrogen 
in new industry, we have to make sure it's safe.  

If we have a problem with safety, the 
impact that could have on the street could  

be huge. So I think we are trying to 
introduce free packages to our gas tanks. But  

realistically make sure that people 
understand that this is safe.  

So, safety. I think that is very 
important to introduce to the consumer. 

Thank you very much. I believe Deputy 
Minister, you also wanted to add a point. 

I'm circling back to your question, how do we 
again that some ?? basically what we want to do is  

find a quantity which we're willing to subsidize. 
Those end users that required at each moment in  

time the smallest state absolutely. Basically 
that's what they're do so all end users can  

compete in the option, but the option requires 
the smallest green in terms of ?? we think  

those are the most ways to attract heavy regions 
of the city where ?? that's the way we are  

envisioning it, and we believe this is the best 
way to ensure preproduction consumption. We are  

producers and we will provide resources with 
the mechanism that we basically finance.  

Where the carbon price is not high enough 
to make hydrogen commercials viable.  

If carbon prices rise, then the subsidies 
will seize because that's the advantage of  

carbon CFT option. It's not a fill in. And 
we believe this is the most efficient way  

to manage subsidies and to attract end users.
Very interesting. Thank you very much for  

that. I believe that Minister 
Mesa also wanted to say a word. 

Yes, just to complicate what the Deputy Minister 
said from pouring. We were talking about how to  

promote demand for hydrogen, which you also think 
of the policymakers. If you have incentive on  

the supply side and they go to the production of 
reliable ?? I think it's important to think about  

incentives for any users to make the switch 
and an incentive to demand clean energy such  

as in hydrogen. It has to be well?balanced 
between subsidies and taxes. I'm not only  

analyzing the consumption of some fields while 
attempting to watch all of the supply side. 

Thank you very much. One last question. It came 
in from the audience. There is really nobody  

from this region to address it, but I'm going 
to give it to the two Latin American voices  

on the panel because the question 
is this. What is your opinion  

on North America's opportunities to become 
a green hydrogen export championship? So,  

Chile and Colombia, are you looking at significant 
competition from the north? Minister Jobet? 

I'm not an expert, but we have a 
company developing a product in Chile. 

It's very, very competitive nature. 
I mean, you want a smart thing,  

there are certainly areas they think. For 
example, Texas where the combination of solar,  

rain and wind. We're not out to whatever it was 
per hour. That is very competitive to produce.  

And eventually export hydrogen. I think in 
the US is changing, particularly in the last  

couple of months. We are convening, but we need 
to get together so cooperation, this mixture of  

cooperation and competition, I think. If 
a player invests heavily in this solution,  

it will accelerate its development. 
So I think that would be good news. 

Thank you. I believe Minister Mesa also 
wanted to speak to this point and then ?? 

I agree with what Minister Jobet said. We 
can leverage some of the technology that's  

going to be possible with the new focus on 
climate change in the US administration,  

but thinking about competition, I think we 
could also leverage our natural, you know,  

competitive advantage in countries like Colombia. 
Even though, you know, one of the main inputs for  

green hydrogen is viable renewable energy because 
of our location, because we don't have seasons,  

even that variability can be more 
predicted in a country likes ours.  

It's an advantage we have, but it's a 
natural advantage, and, and we have to  

make sure we are more competitive 
in the production of green hydrogen. 

Thank you very much. Let me go to Kersti, 
who wanted to say something to this point. 

Yeah, thank you very much. I wanted to emphasize 
we've got huge ambitions for hydrogen in Scotland.  

This is an area we need critical mass. 
We saw what happened to a country  

when the US does it. We need the US across the 
world will move to deal with the safety issues.  

And I can't speak for North America, that energy 
commission is in California and they're looking  

really, really hard at hydrogen. I'm not 
sure what extent they're looking to export.  

They use a lot of gas for their heating. In the 
US and as well as other big global players on  

the hydrogen stage. Because we just need them.
Thank you very much. We're simply going to say  

thank you and good-bye to this excellent panel 
looking at the future hydrogen economy. Many,  

many thanks to all of you, and 
utmost success in your endeavors.


