Ladies and gentlemen, we want to now bring 
in two young powerful voices. Both voices  

here, ladies and gentlemen, under 20 years 
of age. Two young activists speaking up  

for climate justice. And I'm going to introduce 
both of them right now and then TED Talk style,  

each will have 4 minutes to deliver her 
message. Begin with Jaime Margolin. She  

is co founder of the International Movement 
Zero Hour, that has led official youth climate  

marches in Washington, D.C. and more than 25 other 
cities. And also has chapters across the globe.  

She has testified before the US Congress 
alongside Greta Thunberg and currently  

suing the US State of Washington for denying her 
generation the constitutional right to a livable  

environment. And it's a measure to welcome Xiye 
Bastida. A Mexican Chilean climate activist. One  

of the major organizers for Fridays for New York 
City. As well as a leading voice for Indigenous  

and immigrant visibility in climate activism. 
A co founder of the Re Earth Initiative  

and serves on the administrative committee 
of the People's Climate movement and as a  

member of the of extinction rebellion. Jamie, 
get us started and Xiye will go after that. 

Thanks so much for having us here. We're 
so happy to be speaking to you all today.  

Yeah. So, thank you for the introduction. My 
name is Jaime Margolin. I'm a 19 year old climate  

justice organizer. I started in the climate 
movement because there's never been a singular  

moment in my life where the climate crisis 
wasn't looming over my life, wasn't dictating  

every way I plan for the future. In summer of 
2019, I cofounded a climate organization called  

Zero Hour in order to try to make leaders pay 
attention and organize and actually take action  

for our futures. And while I think a lot 
has changed in terms of the overall culture  

of people now caring more about the climate 
crisis, in terms of actually getting to where  

we need to go in terms of actually having a just 
transition and making the solutions that we need,  

that change still needs to happen.
My family    while I was born in the  

United States, my family on my mom's side is 
from Colombia. And I think it's important in  

our conversation about climate justice that 
we don't leave Latin America behind and the  

movements that are taking place there.
Colombia is the deadliest place in the  

world to be an environmental organizer. So, it 
has the highest rates of environmental murders.  

And that is something that I think a lot of people 
also need to understand how people are literally  

risking their lives in order to stand up for 
our Earth, for our planet. A lot of the fights  

in Colombia and in Latin America are to protect 
the Amazon Rain Forest. And without it    a lot of  

people overlook the Amazon Rain Forest. The fight 
to protect the green spaces and the wild spaces  

of our world. But we need to understand, without 
the Amazon Rain Forest, without the green spaces  

and the wildlife that is currently being 
destroyed and de forested as we speak,  

we're not going to survive this climate crisis.
The Amazon Rain Forest serves as a carbon sink  

that sucks out carbon from the air and helps 
in our fight against climate change. So,  

world leaders need to step up in terms of 
supporting the Indigenous people on the  

ground who are fighting to protect the Amazon 
Rain Forest as well as the organizers all over  

the world who are fighting to protect the last 
wild spaces of our planet before it's too late.  

It's important, also, especially, you know, in 
the had United States I think a lot of people  

are under the misconception that because we now 
have a new Administration that automatically  

means that suddenly everything is okay, and 
the climate crisis is solved because we have  

a non climate denying Administration.
But people also need to understand  

that it goes far beyond simply acknowledging 
that the climate crisis is real. We need to  

take steps further to really take radical climate 
action for my generation before it's too late.  

This means banning fracking. This means a 
green new deal, shutting down the Dakota  

access pipeline and stopping line 3 and stopping 
all new fossil fuel infrastructure. The lawsuit  

I'm a part of in Washington State. I'm a plaintiff 
along with 12 other plaintiffs. There are 13 of us  

total. Youth in the State of Washington.
And we're suing because in the American  

founding documents it says that we have the 
rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of  

happiness. But how can you have life, liberty and 
the pursuit of happiness without clean air, clean  

water and a future. It's not that governments 
are not taking action on climate change. They're  

actively worsening it. Actively continuing to 
approve new drilling permits. Continuing to  

allow new fossil fuel infrastructure to 
be built when our planet cannot afford  

any fossil fuel infrastructure. We are suing for 
a climate recovery plan. And it's time that world  

leaders everywhere understand that the first step 
to stop this climate crisis is to stop digging. 

Stop with the new fossil fuel infrastructure. No, 
natural gas is not a transition fuel. There's no  

such thing. We need to go immediately to renewable 
energy, 100%. There can be no more fracking. There  

can be no more pipelines. The pipelines that exist 
now, like the Dakota Access Pipeline have to be  

dismantled. We have to completely transition away 
from fossil fuel infrastructure and make sure that  

we support those on the ground who are fighting to 
protect the green spaces of our world. Thank you. 

Thank you very much to Jaime Margolin. And we'll 
go straight on now to Xiye Bastida. Please. 

Thank you so much. And thank you, Jamie, for that 
very eloquent picture of where we are right now.  

And I'll introduce myself. My name is Xiye 
Bastida. I'm an 18 year old climate activist from  

Mexico and Chile and I'm an organizer with Fridays 
for Future. I'll also share some of my story. 

And that is I was born in a small Mexican town as 
parts of the Indigenous community. I grew up with  

Indigenous value of reciprocity. Meaning that 
we take care of Mother Earth because Mother  

Earth takes care of us. As I grew older, 
I realized that there was a disconnect  

between the world that I thought we lived in, 
which is one of unity and working together,  

to one where people are profiting off of 
destruction, extraction and generating pollution. 

So, for me, that was when my bubble 
burst as I started to realize that  

we were in this path of self destruction. And in 
2015, my hometown actually suffered from flooding  

which made me realize not only that the climate 
crisis is already happening. Not in 50 years,  

not in a hundred years. And that it's also 
affecting marginalized communities the most.  

Communities that have the least resources to 
deal with the impacts of the climate crisis. 

And that is why our climate solutions 
have to be holistic and intersectional.  

Because it's not only about the parts per million 
of carbon in the atmosphere, but how do we  

intentionally draw down that carbon and 
stop emitting carbon into the atmosphere  

while taking communities into consideration 
and communities health into consideration? 

And I'll also talk a little bit about Latin 
America. Because I think it's so important that  

we highlight the global south as a whole. 
And I'll talk about two things really briefly  

which is ecotourism and prioritization. So, 
ecotourism might seem like the eco friendly  

alternative to regular tourism. But we 
must not lose sight of the fact that  

it is actually just displacing communities 
and creating a weird type of market  

that is, you know, basically brainwashing what 
we should actually be doing which is taking care  

and protecting our sacred sites. And 
the second thing is privatization. 

In Chile which is where I'm from, we have 
this huge problem of water privatization.  

And the thing with it is that consumers end 
up paying 50% more for water service that is  

private than one that is public. And a survey 
by food and water watch found that 10% of     

sorry, privatization contracts found that after 
taking over a system, water companies reduced  

the workforce by 34%. It's actually damaging 
for communities to privatize waters and it's  

something that should be a human right, after all.
And I think that Jamie went over some of my  

demands, no more fracking, no more fossil 
fuel infrastructure. And some things I want  

to highlight is decarbonizing power, which is 
something that John Kerry already talked about.  

It's important to remember that the United States 
has the largest per capita energy consumption  

of power. So, that basically means that even 
though we are not producing the most carbon,  

we are still the individuals who produce 
the most carbon when we get our power. 

So, it is very important to have solutions that 
directly tackle this. Tackle the way in which  

we're actually living our lives to one that 
is more pointed towards unity and cooperation  

rather than competition. And we do know that 
the reason why it's been so hard to transition  

to renewable energy is because it's so cheap, 
it's not profitable for firms to transition.  

We have to make sure that that is a point that is, 
you know, that is considered as parts of the cost  

of keeping    of being dependent on carbon. 
And that's why it's important to transition  

because the cost is greater than what we're 
getting    than the profits that we're getting. 

I want to thank you so much for having 
both Jamie and I speak to you today. 

Xiye Bastida, Jaime Margolin, we're grateful for 
sharing your perspectives and reminding us what  

is at stake here. Thank you. We wish 
you utmost success in your endeavors.


