Our next speaker is serving as 
international champion on adaptation  

and resilience for the COP26 presidency. 
It is a great pleasure to hand over now  

to the British Minister for business and 
energy, Anne Marie Treveylan. Welcome. 

Thank you so very much. And thank you 
to the Germany Government for hosting  

this event. And my personal thanks to Svenja 
Schulze for her leadership and her continued  

collaboration with the UK. Particularly 
in this important year for climate action.  

It was through Svenja's leadership that Germany 
joined the alliance, the initiative that I  

co chair with my Canadian counterpart, Wilkinson. 
Germany has been part of it for a year and a half,  

working on the world stage to advance the 
transition from unabated coal powered to  

clean energy. Which is a key priority for the 
UK's up and coming G7 and COP26 presidencies. 

The BBCA now has over a hundred members. And at 
the BBCA Summit earlier this month, gained another  

10 members. The pace of the transition really is 
increasing. If we are to meet the Paris Agreement  

goals, coal powered generation must fall and end 
in countries by 2030. And looking at a job rich  

transition away from coal, it's a win win and 
must be the crucial first step for countries  

to reach their commitments. So, my thanks once 
again to my German colleagues for your continued  

support. And thank you for hosting me today.
Climate change is unequivocally one of the  

biggest challenges we face. Want IPCC warned 
us of exceeding global temperature rises  

of the 1.5 degrees. It was then cause for 
countries to adopt climate targets, began to grow.  

Yet 2020 saw record temperatures and fires 
across the world and storms intensifying.  

And in this context, the coronavirus pandemic has 
overtaken as another pressing global challenge.  

However, as we begin to look to life after 
the pandemic, reaching net zero must remain  

at the core of our recovery strategies. We 
must build back better, and we must build  

back greener than before. Achieving this 
will depend on both national climate action  

and, of course, international cooperation.
So, let me talk each of these in turn.  

Following that special report in 2019, 
the UK legislated for net zero by 2050.  

And since then, we have begun to deliver on 
net zero as the basis of our recovery plan.  

In November of last year, the prime minister 
Boris Johnson published a 12 point plan for  

the industrial revolution. And leveraging three 
times the cost from the private sector to create  

and support up to 250,000 green jobs in the UK. 
Central to this plan is advancing off shore wind. 

We need to quadruple our offshore wind capacity 
to generate more wind by 2040, more than enough  

to power every home in the UK. It is vital that we 
work with Germany and other neighbors in the North  

Sea to achieve our collective decarbonization 
plans. We had a 2030 phase out for petrol  

vehicles. And there's millions of pounds of 
government support for the infrastructure.  

As COP, we are asking other countries to adopt 
similar phase out plans. The UK came forward  

with an increased nationally recognized Paris 
Agreement. Raising it to at least 68% reduction  

in emissions by 2030. But we did not stop there. 
At the end of last year, the prime minister also  

announced that the UK will end our support for 
fossil fuels overseas. End our export finance,  

aid funding and trade promotion for new gas 
and oil projects with limited exceptions. 

And ahead of COP26, the UK will have a net 
zero strategy to build on the prime minister's  

ten point plan that we discussed. And today we 
will publish an industrialized decarbonization  

strategy which sets out how they can get 
to net zero while remaining competitive and  

helping emissions abroad. National climate 
change is necessary, but not sufficient.  

Climate change is a global problem, 
and it needs a global solution.  

So, at the end of last year on the fifth 
anniversary of the Paris Agreement,  

we convened a Summit with the UN and France 
which brought together 75 world leaders. 

The Summit saw 45 new NDCs, 24 net zero 
commitments and 20 new adaptation and  

resilience plans. Around this time, we also saw 
new landmark net zero commitments from China, from  

Japan and from South Korea who together emitted 
one third of all global carbon emissions in 2018.  

But despite these positive shifts, as last month's 
UN report sets out, as Svenja mentioned, we are  

still worrying off track to meet the temperature 
goals of the Paris Agreement and yet to see  

enhanced NDCs from many countries. To remedy this, 
we need to think big and use everything at our  

disposal. The UK will be using its G7 presidency 
as a steppingstone to COP26. We will seek to bring  

the G7 together to commit a group of the world's 
largest economies collectively to net zero by 2050  

and collaborate on ambitious short and medium term 
central commitments to support this goal. 

Through to COP26, we are talking for progress in 
four priority areas. Firstly, reducing emissions  

through more countries setting net zero targets. 
And ambitious NDCs that align with net zero  

and keep 1.5 degrees within reach. Secondly, to 
strengthen adaptation to help the world adjust  

to the impact of climate change which we can see 
today. The UK launched the action coalition to  

convert our call to action from the climate action 
summit into practical reality. Thirdly, we need  

to get finance flowing through public and private 
channels to deliver the $100 billion a year goal. 

I know our German colleagues were prioritizing 
this with the Petersburg Climate Dialogue. The  

COP26 presidency will host a climate ministerial 
at the end of this month to gather increased  

commitments from donors. We have seen how quickly 
we can move finance when faced with a crisis.  

We can reach the $100 billion goal. The UK 
is going to double to 11.6 billion pounds  

over the next 5 years and calling on other 
countries to similarly raise their ambition.  

And we need to enhance international collaboration 
and cooperation. To gather decarbonization faster  

across the important sectors. We have the energy 
transition council, the zero emissions transition  

council and the first commodity trade dialogues 
to drive real world action in the key areas.  

Emissions from transport in particular are 
going faster than any other sector. We need  

to double electric vehicles to achieve the goal, 
including phaseout dates for combustion vehicles.  

We hope to work particularly closely with 
Germany in this endeavor in the run up to COP26.  

Just to conclude, while it's clear that the 
transition to climate neutrality is beginning,  

more must be done to avert dangerous climate 
change and seize the opportunities of the  

transition. The UK's G7 and COP26 presidencies  

will be key moments to drive this forward.
And I know they have a huge responsibility  

here. But I'm confident that 
we can rise it this challenge  

and show that the Paris Agreement is working and 
that between us we can all deliver. Thank you.


