And ladies and gentlemen, as you know, we were 
just discussing agenda 2030. And it was just one  

of two landmark agreements that were signed 
in 2015. The other, of course, was with the  

Paris Climate Agreement. We are deeply excited 
to be joined here today by the American leader  

who helped bring the Paris Climate Treaty 
to fruition. Secretary of State at the time.  

He previously served in the US Senate, 
chairing its Foreign Relations Committee.  

And now he's back on the global climate 
stage as the United States first Presidential  

Envoy for Climate. And the first ever principal 
to sit on the National Security Council  

with a mandate entirely dedicated 
to fighting the climate crisis.
 

It is a great honor to introduce and hand 
over to our keynote speaker, John Kerry.
 

Thank you. Thanks so much, Dr. crane. And thanks 
for the very kind introduction and for your role  

here. I'm very delighted    I'm delighted, with 
all of you today. I want to begin with thanking my  

friends, Minister Heiko Maas and Peter Altmaier. 
Less than two months in, I'm very confident  

that all together, with the help of good friends 
like them and many others around Europe, we're  

going to be able to make a world of difference 
for our countries and really for the whole world.  

And our shared work on climate is 
absolutely critical, needless to say.
 

I want to congratulate you for hosting the Seventh 
Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue. Germany's  

Energiewende. It's an inspiration. An important 
moment to exchange ideas. And it reflects  

a long period, really decades, of determination 
to transition away from fossil fuels and pioneer a  

new path for our countries to follow. I also want 
to acknowledge the role that Germany has played.  

Leading efforts to form a consensus among EU 
members on a more ambitious 2030 climate target.  

And simultaneously a COVID relief 
package that promises a green recovery.
 

It's fair to say that you've always been a 
stalwart ally in the climate fight. But in  

recent years, I personally have been particularly 
grateful for Germany's leadership. Not only within  

the EU, but also through multilateral, the G7, 
the G20. The UN Security Council where we worked  

very closely together on the Iran Nuclear 
Agreement as well as Paris and other things.  

And obviously, as we gear up for 
COP26 in Glasgow at the end of year.
 

I guess    it's really cliche, and we 
keep having to reach for the language  

that adequately conveys the 
measure of this threat. But it is  

true that the stakes have literally 
never been higher than they are now.  

We're in what I think is the decisive 
decade for climate action. Why? Because  

even if we did everything we've laid out 
in the Paris Agreement, we're still seeing  

a warming of the Earth's temperature to about 
3.7 degrees. And we're not doing everything.
 

Because clearly to hold the Earth's temperature to 
1.5 degrees and as well as to get the net zero by  

2050, you don't start in 2030 or 2040, you start 
now. Much more effectively than we have been.  

So, we are in the decade of decisions. 
And the decisions we make right now  

leading up to Glasgow and following up through 
Glasgow are going to truly write the future.
 

President Biden understands this, as 
well as much of your leaders and you.  

And that is why he ran on the single most 
ambitious comprehensive climate platform of any  

presidential candidate in US history. It's also 
why, just hours after being sworn in as President,  

he rejoined the Paris Agreement. And a few 
days later, he also signed executive orders  

placing climate squarely at the center of every 
single decision that we are going to be making in  

the US Government. It is a government wide 
initiative. And climate must be front and  

center in every decision that is made.
And the reason for that is pretty simple.  

I guess you all understand it better 
than I do, probably. But I'm gonna  

repeat to some degree anyway the obvious. Because 
the obvious is what is gonna try to drive us  

to actually solve this. And the obvious is, 
that no one country can solve this problem.  

Thirty% of emissions from China, 
we're 15%, EU, India following,  

Russia, the major emitters. Twenty countries 
equal about 81% of all the emissions on the  

planet. That tells you a story not only about 
the challenge, but about the responsibility.
 

So, we need absolutely without any question 
at all to forge an international strategy  

that galvanizes the world. That drives greater 
ambition from every single country    even the  

less developed country    that could make the 
choice not to build a coal fired power plant  

and do what's necessary to leapfrog. 
Hopefully with the help of the technologically  

and financially more advanced countries.
Next month President Biden is hosting a leaders  

summit on climate. April 22nd, Earth Day, to 
ensure that we continue to hit the ground running.  

And the Summit is an opportunity for the United 
States and others to ensure that we are reengaging  

on the global climate. From our point of view 
that we really do have a responsibility to be  

doing that thoughtfully, strategically, 
at the highest levels of government.  

And as part of the Summit, President Biden 
is going to reconvene the Major Economies  

Forum. Those 20 countries I'm referring to. Those 
countries responsible for most of the emissions.  

And we're gonna do this with a view to try to make 
sure we are all pulling hard in the same direction  

because that decade    the decade of 2020s 
   has got to be the decade of ambition,  

the decade of decision, and the decade of action.
So, it's a sprint. It's a sprint toward  

substantial emission reductions by 2030. Why? 
Because I'll tell you, if you get to 2030,  

ask any of your scientists, any of your technical 
people. The curve that the    the steepness of the  

curve that you then have to get on to meet 2050 
net zero is pretty impossible to achieve barring  

a genius/miraculous breakthrough on storage or 
fission or fusion or direct capture or battery  

storage. A number of things that obviously we're 
pursuing assiduously. I have said many times that  

the United States comes to this rejoining, 
this new effort, with genuine humility  

as well as ambition. And the humility comes 
from our knowing that because of country,  

four years of leadership was lost. Four years 
of effort by our nation in a unified way  

because of the preceding President 
pulling out of that agreement.
 

Humility also because we know that no one 
country is gonna make all the difference.  

No continent alone can get this done. And 
ambition is also what brings us to the table.  

Ambition. Knowing that at the COP in November, we 
either all raise our sights at COP26 in Glasgow,  

or, believe me, we all fail. And I think every one 
of you would agree that failure is not an option.
 

We hear constant talk about how the climate 
crisis is existential. And yet I ask you to  

ask yourself whether you believe we are actually 
responding as if it was in fact existential.
 

So, failure is not an option. 
And ambition is the only  

really critical thing that we have to all focus 
on simultaneously and come not only to the meeting  

in Washington in April, but to the March 31st 
meeting which Europe and China, others will hold,  

the subsequent to the G7 to the UN, to the G20 and 
ultimately to the COP where we have an opportunity  

to codify all of these good intentions.
We know that success means tapping into  

the very best of global ingenuity. Best 
of creativity, diplomacy. From brain power  

to alternative energy power. Using every 
single tool we have to get where we need to go.  

And to accelerate the pace. We know that a zero 
emissions future offers huge opportunity for  

business. Unbelievable opportunity. We're actually 
looking at the largest market human beings have  

ever known. We're looking at the greatest growth 
potential we've ever nobody. We're currently  

4.5 to 5 billion users in the market. It's 
already a multi trillion dollar market.  

But because of what we're all going to need to 
do, it's going to become an even bigger market.  

Bigger financially and bigger in terms of the 
returns on investment. And bigger certainly  

in the challenge. But the truth is that we're 
gonna have up to nine    we're going to go up  

to 9 billion people from the current users. And 
we have a billion people without any electricity  

and it's going to be in the double digits 
of trillions of dollars on annual basis.
 

So, a zero emissions future offers enormous 
job creation. I'll just share with you that  

the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the United 
States recently put out there are only three  

jobs in America that are going to have more than 
50% growth. The highest is at 62% and that's wind  

turbine technician. The second is practicing 
nurses. Registered nurses. And we all know why  

that's growing. And then the third is solar panel 
installer. And that's at 51%. The top at 62%.
 

So, enormous growth potential is staring us in the 
face. We also know that we're all tuning in today.  

I know there's a great deal of commitment. 
Everybody is among the committed.  

But the fact is that we have to acknowledge the 
degree to which we have our work cut out for us.  

And we have to get beyond some of the happy talk 
about NDCs which people are putting out a National  

Defined Contribution that clearly is not gonna get 
the job done. According to most recent statistics,  

emissions globally rose 
over the years since Paris.
 

And while 2020 saw a temporary drop 
in had noble emissions due to COVID,  

they're again on the rise. And many of our 
analysts are predicting a very quick rebound  

unless much more stringent incentives or policies 
are put in place. The science community is given  

us a very clear picture of the chaos that awaits 
us if we don't limit warming to 1.5 degrees. Paris  

says well below    well below 2 degrees or 1.5 
degrees if we can achieve it. But the latest  

IBCC reports say there's no longer a variant 
available to us. We need to achieve the 1.5.
 

And to be on track to get 1.5 and even have a 
66% probability of keeping global temperatures  

from rising more than that 1.5, we need to 
cut global emissions in half by 2030. So,  

I wasn't kidding that I said that this is the 
decisive decade. Now to get where we need to be,  

we need to phase out coal five times faster than 
we have been doing it based on a comparison with  

the trend from 2013 to 2018. We have to increase 
tree cover about five times faster. We have to  

ramp up renewable energy about six times faster. 
And we have to transition to electric vehicles  

at a rate about 22 times faster.
Can you do it? Can we do it? Yes, we can do it.  

Not a question of feasibility. It's a question of 
political will. It's a question of whether or not  

many corporations that    some of whom have been 
in denial for these past years are in our country  

   are gonna turn around and see this economic 
opportunity staring them in the face.
 

So, I believe we can do it. It's not easy. But 
the United States and Germany particularly but  

virtue of the course we are already 
pursuing, I think out to give people  

some confidence. Our two countries are 
pretty well aligned in our fundamental goals  

of leading the world to develop innovative, clean 
technologies. Transforming energy had systems  

across the board. Achieving net zero greenhouse 
gas emissions across global economies by 2030  

or before that. And together, we have a long 
history of leadership on the energy transition.
 

Both of our countries are working 
hard right now to bring about a  

sustainable energy transition by investing in 
a clean economy. And in the industries of the  

future. To drive economic growth, create good 
jobs on both sides of the Atlantic. And we're  

seeing a lot of examples of this partnership. 
Specifically, Ford announced in February  

2021 a $1 billion investment and an ambitious 
timeline to transition its Cologne factory into  

the first Ford all European built 
electric vehicle will be available  

by 2023. Tesla opening up in Brandenburg by the 
end of the year. And we ought to note, Tesla,  

a one brand car    IE, electric, it's 
all innate    is the highest valued  

automobile company in the world. 
That's a sign. The Berlin Brandenburg  

factory aims to become the most advanced high 
volume vehicle production plant in the world.
 

And Amazon, which has invested heavily in mobility 
initiatives in Germany has deployed part of its  

new fleet of environmentally friendly vehicles at 
its newest German hub in Leipzig. This is part of  

what's possible. The energy transition is gaining 
momentum every day thanks in no small measure  

to Germany's sustained decades long effort to 
pioneer the use of clean technologies. Germany's  

landmark EEG law at the turn of the 21st century 
set off a boom in solar and wind power for the  

next two decades. And by guaranteeing a premium 
price for renewable energy, Germany created  

an early market for emerging technologies that 
has gone on to flourish all around the world.
 

In fact, we worked hand in hand to create 
that early solar market. And after Germany's  

law created that rapidly growing solar market, 
the Obama Biden Administration harnessed the 2009  

Recovery Act in the United States to support 
the first five utility scale solar projects  

in the world greater than 100 megawatts. 
Launching a utility scale of solar revolution.  

That is something we should apply as 
a lesson to what we need to do now.
 

Today solar is the cheapest and fastest growing 
power source around the world. Those of  

you involved in it know that there is new 
technology, changing some of the    some of the  

ingredients of the solar panel that will 
make a solar panel perhaps as much as 40%  

more efficient. Which will be an even further 
revolution in the possibilities for countries that  

need to avoid coal and leapfrog to the future.
So, today countries in every corner of the world  

watch Germany bring down the costs of renewable 
energy and solve the technical challenges of  

integrating intermittent wind and solar on to the 
grid. And that example is now emboldened countries  

such as India to even more decisively invest in 
green transition. That is a critical message.
 

Germany is setting examples on how to manage 
not just the deployment of new technologies,  

but the transition to those new technologies.  

I think Germany produces 45% of its electricity 
now from renewables. More than the proportion  

from fossil fuels. And it has developed tools from 
virtual power plants to long distance transmission  

to maintain power reliability even at the highest 
penetrations of renewable energy. It's also,  

I think, showing the world a new way to transition 
from coal power. A tough decision. A big decision.  

And we all know how brutally politically 
complicated some of these decisions can be.
 

But it concluded the first round 
of auctions to retire coal.  

And that's a creative mechanism that pays plant 
owners to shut down and elicits the lowest market  

price to do so. And the government has developed 
a 4 billion plus Euro compensation package.  

Really critical. A compensation package to help 
affected companies and workers as the industry  

transitions by 2038 consistent with its law.
So, my friends, it's critical    critical    that  

we decarbonize power. And President Biden    
and President Biden has now committed    he  

committed actually during the campaign, but 
he's now codifying this in the executive orders  

and in all of the planning that he's doing 
to make sure that we in the United States  

are carbon free. Completely carbon free in 
our US power sector by 2035. More broadly,  

the Administration plans to decarbonize 
all sectors of the company, not just power,  

by putting the United States on a net zero carbon 
emissions path by achieving net zero no later  

than 2050, and sooner if at all possible.
Now, let me share one last thought, a couple  

thoughts with all of you. Some politicians, 
demagogues, usually, want to try to scare people  

and say, oh, this transition's gonna mean you're 
gonna have to give up your lifestyle or, you know,  

you won't be able to turn on the TV. Whatever. 
The scare tactics are quite extraordinary.  

But quite the opposite. What I've just described 
is the latest revolution we have seen like I  

said since the Industrial Revolution. And 
President Biden's Build Back Better agenda  

aligns job creation with the task of 
slashing emissions and with clean energy.  

For example, ramping up public zero emission 
vehicles, cleaning are up the US transportation  

sector, the largest source of US emissions.
We are going to accelerate clean energy  

development. We're gonna level a currently 
tilted playing field. Astonishingly even in '21,  

still it has been tilted more towards fossil fuel 
than towards the renewables. We are going    the  

President has instructed all our Federal 
Agencies to eliminate fossil fuel subsidies,  

to pause new oil and gas leases on Federal 
lands and waters, and to speed up clean energy  

investment. And around the world, we're gonna 
promote fuel based energy while simultaneously  

advancing the alternative renewables.
So, my friends, we have a lot to achieve together.  

Germany has unveiled a very impressive 9 billion 
Euro national hydrogen strategy. I think that  

there are many other things we can do and 
certainly a lot of things we can work on together.  

And we have a chance to transform the way people 
live for the better. Better health, less disease,  

much greater job growth, better economy in the 
long run, more stable, and finally, greater  

security for all of our nations. I think this is 
a transition worth being excited about. And I'm  

delighted to join you today to talk about that.
Thank you so much, John Kerry, for  

your sobering message about the urgency 
of the task before us. But also, for your  

motivational goal and energizing words to all of 
us. I think many of the viewers worldwide will be  

very gratified to hear a leading American 
voice once again saying, yes, we can.
 

You have very kindly agreed to stay 
us with for our Trans Atlantic panel.  

Bear with us because we want to get some 
additional input now for that discussion.


