Dear ministers, dear energy 
friends. The green transition,  

the Energiwende, is a formidable challenge 
and so far the results are very promising.  

The costs of generating renewable 
power have fallen dramatically.  

And solar power and wind power onshore and 
offshore have become competitive alternatives.  

Now we have to shift attention to the other 
elements of the transition. It's about  

decarbonizing industry, balancing the grid and 
ensuring public acceptance. Carbon capture storage  

and hydrogen are important pieces of the solutions 
going forward. Norway has decided to go ahead with  

our full-scale CCS project longship which will 
demonstrate a complete value chain from capture  

of CO2 from industrial processes to safe 
storage in the seabed under the North Sea.  

Our reservoirs have great capacity and we hope to 
be storing CO2 also from European point sources in  

the near future. And we hope that longship 
will contribute to further CCS development  

in northern Europe. My Ministry is currently 
working on a hydrogen roadmap which will be  

presented in a paper later this year. Some 
interesting hydrogen projects are also  

well under way in Norway, and I look very much 
forward to inviting you to cross the fjords in  

hydrogen-powered ferries. And historically, one of 
the first industries putting hydro power to use in  

Norway was the hydrogen production. And the link 
between renewables and hydrogen is very strong.  

In addition, with our large resources of natural 
gas in connection with CCS, we are in a very good  

position to produce large volumes of hydrogen from 
diverse sources and we wish to cooperate strongly  

in the transition going forward. And what matters 
is that we produce enough volumes of clean,  

low-emission hydrogen at the lowest possible 
costs. When it comes to sources of hydrogen,  

we believe it's essential that governments have 
a technology-neutral approach. And this is best  

secured by competitive energy markets with 
efficient pricing of greenhouse gas emissions.  

Germany is a trusted and valued 
partner for Norway also in the  

green transition. I look very much forward 
to seeing you in person some time soon.


