And ladies and gentlemen, we continue with a 
studio session in which we want to pick up on  

some of the messages that we have been hearing. 
I'm joined bit Director General for economic  

affairs and sustainable development at the German 
foreign office, Michael Klor Berchtold. Welcome to  

you. Thank you for being with us. And director 
at BETD 2021, my colleague Jennifer Porto has  

been reading a discussion on the international 
dynamics of green hydrogen. I had the privilege  

of moderating a discussion on green hydrogen 
myself yesterday. Let's get started by talking  

a bit about how the German government sees it. 
What are the implications for green hydrogen  

for international partnerships 
and also for trade relations?
 

Thank you, Melinda. Thank you very much, ladies 
and gentlemen, thank you for the introduction.  

Among all the topics discussed 
here at the BETD in Berlin,  

that came out very clearly. hydrogen strikes 
out because of its likely impact on foreign  

relations and politics in general. It was really 
very impressive by the lively discussions in two  

high ranking panels on hydrogen at this BETD. This 
confirms clearly that there is strong momentum  

behind the idea to make full use of the great 
potential of hydrogen in order to reach climate  

neutrality. If you succeed in calling up a global 
market for a CO2 neutral hydrogen, this will not  

only partially replace fossil fuels and reduce 
CO2 emissions, it will also    and this is my  

specific message from the foreign ministry    it 
will also have far reaching consequences for the  

overall foreign policy and global geopolitics.
These new markets will have a massive impact on  

international relations and the global balance of 
powers. As well as a worldwide trading patterns.  

Those states whose business models are currently 
focusing on the export of fossil fuels might have  

to adapt their existing business strategies 
and perhaps focus on renewable energies.  

Other states with very high potential for 
renewables such as Australia and Latin  

America could benefit from these developments 
and emerge to new global energy power centers.  

The participation by energy ministers of Chile, 
Colombia, Uruguay and Panama in our hydrogen  

panels, it speaks for itself. A responsible 
foreign policy has to have proper responses  

to the new challenges. With our global hydrogen 
diplomacy, we want to ensure that hydrogen does  

not become a divisive issue. Or 
maybe even a new source of conflict.
 

Instead, it should all at creating opportunities 
for all to develop new value chains,  

new jobs, economic growth. We in Germany stand 
ready as a partner for anyone who wants to be part  

of the path towards climate neutrality. 
Furthermore, we want to shape a market that is  

fair, transparent and inclusive. From standards 
and trade rules. We want to avoid technological  

dominance and we want to ensure level playing 
fields for companies from all across the globe.  

Our long term goal is to only use hydrogen 
exclusively from renewable resources.  

At the same time, we are very aware that the 
path towards climate neutrality, hydrogen from  

other sources is still    will still play a role.
But on our future path, we do not want  

to concentrate our efforts on new 
initiatives that would slow down the speed  

of scaling up green hydrogen. To conclude, 
this BETD is only the beginning of a long path.  

A path towards climate neutrality and towards 
a large global market for CO2 neutral hydrogen.  

Germany stands ready as a committed 
and reliable partner on this path.  

The German Foreign Office and our embassies 
worldwide will be ready to support the ramp up  

of a global hydrogen market.
Very interesting. You absolutely  

pick up on a major theme of the discussion we had 
here in the Weltsaal yesterday. When we talked  

about green hydrogen and again and again all of 
the speakers    and they came from Latin America,  

from Scandinavia    all of them emphasizing 
that partnerships are going to be so very  

crucial in this area and in fact there was one 
partnership that was directly mentioned by the  

chief    from the chief scientist of Australia. 
Namely between Australia and Germany. So, clearly,  

this gives meaning to something we always say 
here at the BETD. The energy    the transition  

to green energy, the Energiewende, can only 
succeed if it's a global endeavor. Thank you so  

much for being with us, Director General.
Thank you.


