On the path to climate neutrality 
by 2050 the coming decade plays a  

crucial role. There is a need to undertake 
decisive steps towards decarbonisation.  

And significantly accelerate the energy 
transition politically economically and socially  

in the coming decade. This includes the effective 
and widespread implementation of renewable energy  

technologies in all end users. Including green 
hydrogen but also the implementation of frameworks  

for green investments activities and the inclusion 
of the civil society for the energy vendor.
 

Ladies and gentlemen, welcome back. And we want to 
continue now with a deeper dive. As we heard from  

several of our open session speakers as well as 
in the film, the next nine years of this decade  

will be absolutely critical. Global greenhouse gas 
emissions need to fall by 7.6% each year if the  

world is serious about limiting temperature rises 
to close to 1.5 degrees Celsius. And that is only  

possible through urgent, transformative action to 
boost innovative technologies across the renewable  

energy spectrum. Including green hydrogen, 
which we heard quite a bit about just now in  

our open sessions. As well as new measures 
to unlock green investments and to leverage  

participation by citizens and civil society.
The decisions we make now will determine what  

world our children live in. Can we make this the 
Green Decade and get on the right road by 2030?  

That is the topic of our high ranking panel 
discussion. And before I introduce our speakers, I  

would like to pose an audience question. And I see 
that many of you are already at work answering it.  

But I'm going to give you a little bit more time 
to do so. Our question is this: In your opinion,  

will the world be on an emission reduction 
trajectory by 2030? And keep on voting on  

that if you would. You can use the Slido function 
that you see on your livestream window if you are  

registered a user here at the BETD. And we will 
unveil the results of that poll in just a minute  

after I introduce our speakers. And ladies and 
gentlemen, I am going to keep our intros very  

brief here and throughout the conference in 
order to maximize our time to talk. Because  

all of our panels are pretty compact time wise.
And I would also just like to give a hint to our  

speakers, we would be very grateful if you would 
do the same. Especially in this virtual format.  

Time keeping is of the absolute essence. So, I'm 
going to ask you to please keep your answers to 3  

minutes maximum in our first round of questions 
and possibly    if possible, everyone shorter  

after that. So, with that, I will now begin 
introducing Patricia Espinosa is the indefatigable  

executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention 
on climate change. Lovely to see you again,  

Patricia Espinosa. Leonore Gewessler, Austria's 
Minister for climate action, energy, mobility,  

innovation and technology. Welcome to you. Great 
that you can [call disconnected]    our state  

Secretary. And I'm so pleased to welcome Shanqing 
Lin, the vice minister of China's national energy  

administration. Great to have you with us as 
well, sir. So, let us now take a quick look  

at the results that have audience survey 
before we pose a question to our panel. 

okay. We see that there. There's a large share 
for the optimists here. Thirty six% yes, 32%,  

no. And the maybes are tied with 
the no votes. So, all in all,  

many people skeptical or think in fact we are not 
on track. Let me pose one question for all of our  

panelists and then I'm going to go straight down 
the panel. And the question is this: Given the  

importance of this current decade that we're 
in, I would like to begin by getting your take  

on what are the very most urgent steps that need 
to be taken in the energy sector prior to 2030?  

What has to be done if we are serious about being 
on the "Yes" side that have question? Patricia? 

Thank you if Melinda for the opportunity to 
participate in this very important conversation.  

Yes, it's going to be very difficult. 
But we have an unprecedented opportunity.  

We have an unprecedented opportunity because 
we need to use our economic response in order  

to be full of resilience, sustainable economies 
for our cleaner, greener and healthier future.  

We know that by now we need to work on the 
efforts of 50 trillion and counting. So, my  

message is, spend it correctly to get the 
climate resilient pathways that the Paris  

Agreement outlines. The importance, the urgency 
and the financial case for a green transformation  

in all sectors is outlined in the agreement.
There are three important steps for state and  

non state actors on the road to 2030. First, as I 
said, align with the Paris Agreement. And to deal  

with the two crises at once. The pandemic didn't 
stop the existential climate change emergency.  

But the recovery can help address it. 
Second, implement the Paris Agreement.  

Five years after the agreement was adopted, 
negotiations for its full implementation are still  

not complete. And this must be achieved at COP26. 
And promises. Especially commitments to support  

developing countries, including the mobilization 
of a hundred million. And this is important  

because we are seeing all of these very ambitious 
plans like the deal from the European Union. 

Where if we do not make what is necessary to 
support the efforts in developing countries  

in the countries that have the means to do the 
transformation, all the efforts that are going  

to be made in the most advanced economies 
will be undermined. So, it is very important  

that we also see that the support for the 
transformation to happen everywhere in the world  

is really an essential part of the    of the 
package of actions and decisions we need to make. 

We are hearing a lot about the 2030 and 
the 2050 goals. But commitments by 2030  

have not been fulfilled yet. And this is 
basically about support to developing countries.  

We need to be able to trust. So, we need to 
build trust that what we will do unilaterally and  

committing to new goals will be fulfilled. 
And for that, we need to fulfill the goals  

and commitments that were made before.
There's a very important example.  

Nations were supposed to submit their updated 
climate action plans at the end of last year. More  

than half did not. And it is true. The pandemic 
did affect the functioning in many countries. But  

in others, it was just not a priority. So, the 
third point is that we need to see all indices  

by COP26. The recent indices report shows that 
we are still very, very far from achieving the  

goal. And the indices need to be as ambitious as 
possible. And these plans are looked at once every  

five years. By 2025, the window of opportunity 
will likely be closed. We are making progress,  

it's true. But not fast enough and we 
need to be very conscious about that. 

So, 2021 is key. And you're right. This decade 
is key. 2021 is key because this is a moment  

where we need to take decisions. We need 
to align the recovery efforts with Paris.  

We need to fulfill past promises and complete the 
negotiations and we need to submit all remaining  

this year. Over to you, Melinda.
Thank you so much, Patricia Espinosa  

from the United Nations frame work on climate 
change. Same question now to the rest of our  

panel. Minister Gewessler, most crucial steps if 
we are serious about reaching these goals by 2030? 

Thank you. This is a timely debate. It is a 
decisive decade. We are the last politicians that  

can deliver on the promise of Paris. And it is our 
duty not to fail future generations. And it's a  

decisive year, 2021. It's the year that's the most 
outlined the way we act now at the cross roads of  

these two crisis that we face. The COVID crisis 
and the climate crisis will decide on our pathway  

to a more decisive future. And a decisive future 
and year. And to deliver on the promise of the  

Paris Agreement, especially in the energy sector. 
We have two absolutely no are get options. We need  

to invest heavily and advance in efficiency. 
And we need to move forward in replacing  

fossil fuels and nuclear energy by renewables.
That's two absolutely no regret options that  

we have at our hand and that we need to deliver 
all in 2021 onwards. What we do in Australia, we  

recently decided on our new renewables law. Which 
will deliver on the renewable side. Our goal is to  

have 100% renewable electricity by 2030. That 
means adding 50% renewable capacity in just 9  

years. Big task. Needs a stable, good political 
framework. And we also work on the efficiency side  

with a special focus on transport and buildings 
because these are two key sectors in this respect  

with a big renovation wave and with a focus on 
transforming the transport and mobility sector  

towards focus on also efficiency and renewables.
But this needs to be embedded in thing two major  

processes that    that we face. The one thing is 
that it needs European and global coordination.  

On the European level, I think it's crucial we  

keep path on the Green Deal. That we not only 
deliver on an ambitious climate law, but the Fit  

for 55 package delivers on the mission of the 
Green Deal. And the second, we need to be very  

clear. Energy transition will only be a successful 
exercise if we have our societies on board. And  

this means dialogue. This means just transition. 
And this means most of all making our citizens,  

making our people actors in the energy transition.
And this is just four points that I think we need  

to focus on especially in 2021.
Thank you very much,  

also for that emphasis on public discourse and 
acceptance. Let me move on now to Minister bin  

Salman. Same question to you, most 
crucial steps that need to be taken. 

Good afternoon, and 
her excellency, the Commission President.  

I think we in Saudi have always demonstrated 
and last of which was the last G20 last year.  

We worked together with all the G20 
countries to ensure that we have a good  

material with the conclusion of our activities 
for the G20 on the on the statement that was  

issued. There are quite a few things that folks 
and does address many of these topical issues  

that are of concern. To name a few, the carbon 
economy was approved to be a good way forward. 

We want to make sure that, also, as a 
reliable long term hydrocarbon producer, we  

will not be shy in being part of the solution. 
In fact, I took it upon myself    the government  

took it upon itself    that we should not just 
strive to be part of the solution. Actually, be  

building some solutions and serious solutions 
to help us mitigate the concerns that there  

were with regard to climate change.
That's why we want to be an example to  

many of the hydrocarbon producers in how we 
conduct ourselves and show the world that we are  

pioneering solutions. We need the support and 
collaboration of Germany. We find technology  

   technology and innovations is the right path. 
While we are also taking upon us the challenge of  

conducting some of the solutions.
For example, we are introducing green  

hydrogen on a huge scale. We are converting 
our sector consumption to its 50% of renewable  

and 50% of gas. Even with gas, we are 
ensuring that gas production    we still  

have a good if not the best record on planet 
Earth on emissions in activities. The liquid  

displacement that we will be introducing 
this year with the goal of reducing our  

petroleum consumption and all the 
activities are made even better. We have a  

huge amount of savings when it comes to emissions.
We are involved in so many international  

activities. Just to name a few, mission 
innovation, clean energy ministry, carbon sequestration,  leadership 

forum. And we are committed to creating a 
platform. I think the Commission, and everybody  

can be innovative in how to be 
creative in being inclusive. Mindful of  

national situations in each of these 
so called I would call it serious  

participants. I think I hope 
   that we have not    that we  

undoubtedly have shown and demonstrated our 
seriousness and our ability to work with others. 

I believe that in our indices we have submitted in 
2015, it says a lot. When we submit because we are  

only required to submit on 2025 as our colleague 
was saying, we will see more. And we will see     

because we honestly believe that there is a lot 
to contribute with and a lot to benefit from.  

If we are to maintain ourselves as a 
long term hydrocarbon producer, we have to be  

innovative enough and collaborative enough to 
ensure that these hydrocarbon resources will be  

monetized in a better way. That's why we have 
also launched a big program. It's called actually  

the sustainability program. To find ways and 
means to use the hydrocarbon in different ways.  

Especially in terms of material which would 
not be in any way impacting our activity,  

affecting the environment in any way at all.
So, even building a case that even if the market  

may shrink in terms of size, we would have the 
ability to improve our lot with monetizing and  

extracting the natural resources certainly in 
a better way, in a more effective way, more  

efficient way. And certainly, more commensurate 
to maintaining and preserving the climate.  

We are demonstrating and we are waiting to 
be demonstrated and will showcase what we  

have been doing and what we will be doing 
hopefully at the end of this year in COP26.  

We will demonstrate that we are scoring 
and scoring well when it comes to  

the four Rs of the circular carbon economy.
We will demonstrate how much    we will just  

demonstrate how much we will be doing on 
the    the reduce in terms of efficiency  

and changing to renewable. In terms of 
recycling, reusing and as was our friend from the  

EU Commission, the President was mentioning, which 
was how to preserve and how to be a bigger part  

of that endeavor to ensure that sinks will 
be protected. In fact, sinks should be  

advanced and enhanced. Thank you.
Minister, thank you very much.  

And let me move now to State Secretary Kumar 
from India. India has been making impressive  

progress on the renewables front. In view of the 
time, I'm going to ask you to say a few words  

about the most crucial next steps to meet your 
renewable energy targets and what targets you  

will aiming for now in the coming nine years.
Thank you very much,  

your excellency. It is a great 
pleasure for me to speak at this forum  

about our carbon emissions. And that is from 
the Minister, and we are meeting this week.  

And we have a group of resolutions. That is 
the foremost challenge for mankind and us also.  

And for the country and the actions undertaken 
the plan as a commitment to better our conditions.  

And we will have energy expansion which 
we will fight for increasing it. And  

getting to 175 gigawatt by the year 2032. 
And we want to work on that sooner. And we  

are also committed to achieve full energy by 2030.
The extension brings the challenge of the power.  

In addition to the power, and hydro, we will work 
   and hydrogen    hydrogen emissions. And we're  

going to take up and launch very soon a 
very ambitious fast project for    and  

we're also contemplating emissions and they are 
ambitious. And we will be working to achieve the  

goal of zero emissions and full efficiency. And 
this is by 2035. And we are working toward it. 

The focus should be a safer and    the 
power generation. And we have taken ways to  

look at the efficiency of power plants. 
And there are old and inefficient plants,  

and they have units of around 16 gigawatt 
over the last few years. And we are working on  

our technology. And to advance the technology to 
power our emission units. We also decided that  

from their 270, all of them have super critical 
technology. So, as to be the best at emissions. 

We are also in the process of making 
our coal based capacity into the  

best plants and working on all electricity in the 
next few years. And we are looking at the market  

of the world. We are energy efficiency objectives  

and I'm happy to share those energy efficiency 
objectives. We have achieved    tons by # to 20.  

And we are now looking at 300 million 
tons of carbon and emissions. And I have a  

feeling it is a very impressive achievement, 
and we are working on achieving the indices.  

And we have the emission rate, 
much less than the world average. 

And we have a reduction of 24% of 
emission intensity by 2016. And we are     

India has already embarked on the 
roadmap with the significant progress.  

But achieving    and we are working 
to achieve future emission goals.  

And we are one of the largest economies in the 
world. And perhaps the only large economies that  

on track to achieve this. And I truly owe it to 
them. And last year we were working on it, and  

the spirit, thank you.
Thank you very much,  

State Secretary Kumar. And we come now to China 
and Vice Minister Lin. And Mr. Lin, it has been  

mentioned several times at the conference that 
President Xi made a promise last September  

to decarbonization China before 2060. Last week 
you published the long plan with the longer  

vision to 2035. What steps are you taking right 
now and in the course of the next few years  

to put China on that path to achieving the 
bigger goal of carbon neutrality before 2060?

Moderator, ladies and gentlemen, I'm delighted to be able to join you at the Seventh Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.

And at the UN General Assembly last year, we did indeed announce our emission targets which we intend 

to lead to carbon neutrality and we have taken some measures, specific measures.  For example, we need clean energy.

We need efficient energy.  In particular, we need to reduce our energy consumption.  We need to actively increase the amount 

of renewable energy.  And we also need to increase the amount of clean, renewable energy such as hydropower.

And we need to develop energy storage technologies.
We need smart electricity transmission distribution systems.

And we need to ensure that renewable energy and†   energy become the main pillar of our energy mix.

In the industrial sector, in particular China, has already shown the way forward.  In fact, we are able 

to attain the standards we set ourselves. For example, we're trying to ensure†   because this happens in road traffic.

  We want a moderate use of energy and raw materials input in road traffic, and we want to obtain a green lifestyle.

And this is particularly true of the question of how we can replace traditional sources of energy with electrical energy. 

How can we cut China's per capita energy consumption?  Or how can we cut in terms of GDP?

And then the third question is how, when we put up new clean energy infrastructure, how can we have breakthroughs?

How can we reach a low carbon economy?  How can we use new materials?  How can we use new materials to help us save energy?

How can we assure that the progress of science and technology makes that possible for us?  And then we can also think about what measures we need to take in order

to have a holistic low carbon lifestyle in our society.  And in particular, what we call a "Green lifestyle,"

 is something we are pursuing, and the Chinese government is really working very hard on these goals.  And we assure that we can rely

on the support of our entire population as we pursue our ambitious targets for 2030, for 2060.  And we're looking forward

to intensifying the cooperation with the world view and looking forward to working with you to help solve the world's climate problems.  Thank you.

Thank you so much, Vice Minister Lin. 
And with an eye on the clock, dear speakers,  

I'm going to move us on to our closing round 
of discussion. I'm very sorry, but as I said,  

we have a very compact time frame today. So, let 
me ask all of you to speak to this: What are the  

biggest challenges you see on that road to 2030? 
On that road to decarbonization and climate  

neutrality? And how can international cooperation 
help to meet those challenges. All of you are  

involved in various forms of international 
partnership. I would like you to speak  

please specifically to that point because it has 
been emphasized here several times today. This  

will only work if it is an international concerted 
action. Patricia Espinosa told us at the beginning  

of the conversation, it is all about cooperation. 
Especially with developing and emerging economies.  

Straight down the panel. Biggest challenge and 
how cooperation helps to meet it. Dear speakers,  

maximum of 8 or 9 minutes for this. So, please 
keep your answers concise if you would. Patricia  

Espinosa get us started, please.

Yes, Melinda, cooperation is required because 
the climate cruise is an existential threat  

to humanity. Working together is the only way to 
address it. And cooperation, by the way, we need  

it not only internationally. We need it across all 
jurisdictions. Across ministries in governments  

and aligned with the private sector. In the 
energy sector that has such an important role  

to achieve the goals by the Paris Agreement, 
we need cooperation to get there. We must  

substantially reduce fossil fuel use. We must 
reach to low carbon energy carriers, invest in  

low carbon energy and use our current energy more 
efficiently. That's a lot, a lot. A big agenda. 

But good news as we have heard from speakers 
today is that there have been rapid improvements  

in the technology. And there has been an 
embrace of that technology that we have seen  

with wind and solar energy. And we know we are 
seeing that there are important investments in  

new technologies like green hydrogen.
So, we really have a long way to go.  

Secretary General has put together some points in 
order to get there. He has called on countries to  

embrace this low carbon electricity, to halting 
the construction of new coal fired power plants  

and retiring the existing coal fired power plants. 
He has called on limiting the construction of  

new gas fired power plants and as well to 
replace cars that use gasoline with those using  

electricity. Which is something that's starting 
to happen. But still, we need to accelerate that. 

So, this transition is not only about the 
technologies. It requires changes at national  

levels. It requires really a lot of policy, the 
right policies, the right legal frameworks. And  

that is very important. And this is also 
one area where NDCs can make a contribution.  

Because in those plans, governments can set those 
policies. Can set carbon pricing. Can set us  

up very specific goals in facing our fossil 
fuel subsidies. Can reduce fossil fuel demand. 

So, the transition must also be done in 
a just way. So, the plans that we need,  

need to work for all. We need    we should not 
leave anyone behind. And it has to be fair for  

all. So, it's a very, very challenging agenda. 
But I am sure that with international cooperation,  

we can make it. We need the support of 
the financial community to also align  

with the Paris Agreement. Investors need 
to invest in these new, better future. 

And we need everyone else on board. Companies, 
to cities to civil society and individuals.  

So, accelerate what we are already seeing 
but not yet at the level that is required.  

Over to you, Melinda.
Thank you so much,  

Patricia. We're going to be picking up on a number 
of those themes, including the role of cities,  

and the role of local government in subsequent 
sessions here at the BETD. Leonore Gewessler,  

Patricia mentioned coal. Austria is out of 
coal. You have set yourselves a very challenging  

renewables target. One hundred percent by 2030. 
Speak briefly to where cooperation can help you  

get there.

I    we're facing a global emergency 
with the climate crisis. And  

as Patricia Espinosa said, everybody on board. 
We need to deliver nationally. So, that's why,  

very hard on building all the cornerstones for the 
energy transition we need. We need to do that and  

get the support in international and in the 
region. Because I think many of the solutions by  

definition will be European, will be even global. 
Hydrogen is    green hydrogen is just one example. 

The cooperation I think    and this is what 
needs to guide us in this    needs to be a  

tool to deliver towards our goals. To be true to 
the Paris Agreement. To give an answer to future  

generations on the biggest crisis humanity 
faces. The climate crisis. So, if you asked  

in your first question what would be the biggest 
challenges I see on this? Because without a doubt,  

this is a project that means we are navigating big 
changes. It's the challenge of delivering on the  

pace and the urgency we need in this transition. 
And the fact that we cannot leaf anybody behind  

in this endeavor. We need bold and 
courageous policies at this point in  

time to build a better and a green and a more 
resilience future. And in the energy system,  

this means big changes. The best way to 
predict the future of the energy system  

right now is to shape it. And I think this 
is our tasks as politicians. Nationally,  

in European and in global cooperation.
Thank you very much,  

Minister Gewessler. To State Secretary Kumar 
again. Request for a very brief answer, please. 

Yeah, the most important 
changes are making technology cheaper  

as fast as possible. Because we are in the process 
of announcing the energy. But that requires  

power sources which are currently battery and 
green hydrogen. The cost of these technologies,  

they need to get to the feasible level very 
quickly. We need a lot of international  

cooperation to work on these two    these 
two technologies and we need more technology  

to come up. And this cooperation, like in 
India, I'll give an example, with the energy,  

every state has to give us information. The issue 
of density and availability. And now we have been  

successful in integrating at the national level.
So, all the energy is in the national grid. We can  

benefit the city and also have better stability. 
Moving forward, we have given the call for  

a new initiative, one sun, one Earth, one 
grid. Let us integrate and grow as fast as  

possible so we can reap the benefits. And we 
can make certain that we are even more viable.  

The hard part is also the market integration of 
the green energy. India has been successfully     

has been successfully using green energy in 
our power exchanges. We have already a green  

market. A green market. We have integrated 
technology development, international cooperation  

and market innovation with energy. Thank you.
Thank you, State Secretary. And just  

remind everybody that alliance that you 
mentioned, one sun, one world, one grid,  

will actually connect 140 different countries 
through a common grid to transfer solar power when  

it is realized. So, over to Minister bin Salman. 
We are unfortunate almost at the end of our time. 

I will keep it simple 
and short. You have asked the question what to do.  

Very simple. We are done with negotiation. 
We are now in the phase of delivering  

what we have negotiated. We have the Paris 
Agreement, and we are working willingly executing  

what we have agreed to in the Paris Agreement. 
And everybody who signed that agreement should be  

committed to executing it. So, we    I 
think we're beyond the negotiation towards  

the application of what we've agreed to. If 
we have    to executing what we've agreed to,  

I think we should make it more available to the 
terms and conditions of that agreement. Which is  

it is an agreement for all emissions in 
all sectors. And for that, we need to have  

enough to take into the spirit and the details of 
that agreement. We have to be mindful of current  

circumstances. Whereby if you want a 
holistic solution, a collaborative solution,  

mentioning that it should 
involve and include everybody.  

If you want to be inclusive, you have to 
be mindful of the circumstances of each  

and all who are wanting to participate with you.
And again, we have to make sure technologies and  

innovation are available to all. And ensure the 
application of these technologies will not be  

given to the few and kept away from 
the most needed parts. We have,  

for example    in the   
Minister, I'm afraid  

I'm going to have to stop you there because we 
are just about out of time and I do want to also  

move to the last speaker. Thank you very much 
for that. Vice Minister Lin, your thoughts,  

please. Biggest challenge and how cooperation 
can help in one minute if you would be so kind.
 

 

Well, thank you very much.  I shall really try to stick to one minute.  The first question was, what's the biggest challenge for China?

Particularly that refers to the optimization of the energy structures and the second question was where does China see itself?

And we, of course, try, of course, all levels to modernize the energy sector.  We try in particular to progress clean energy.

We try to cover our peak flows better.  And in particular, we try†   we're trying to have better peak load.

And we want to have coal fired fire generation down from 70% to less than 60% in terms of coal fired generation and the renewables

is also an important issue.  And we have more than a hundred gigawatts†   190 of gigawatts installed capacity in the field of renewables.

And when you look at what economic growth China's still achieving, then the security and levels of the energy supply

 and the distribution and this is a very important issue for us.  Thank you very much.  I hope I didn't exceed my time.  Thank you very much to the moderator.

Thank you very much, Vice Minister. 
And to all of our speakers, I greatly  

appreciate your participation in our 
panel. You have given us important  

impulses for our discussions. Minister Gewessler 
is back for me to say good bye to you as well,  

madam. I appreciate your 
participation. Thank you and good bye.


