President von der Leyen, colleague Maas, state secretaries, US and all around the world.  This is the Seventh Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue. 

And probably this is the most important one so far.  Heiko Maas has said that we've got 30 years to meet our target of climate neutrality.

But we're also looking back at 30 years in which tens and hundreds of thousands of citizens, activists, idealists, NGOs, government representatives, prime ministers,

have advocated the targets of sustainability, the energy transition and climate neutrality.  And we're looking back

on a large series of setbacks and defeats.  But also, at remarkable successes. 

 And we have succeeded in this time in reducing carbon emissions in certain parts of the world.  While in others, it has risen substantially.

Germany, as we'll be hearing today, has achieved its goal of cutting carbon emissions from 1990 by 2020 by 40%.  Not least due to the events in the last few months.

We were all very sad when we had to decide to make the Seventh Berlin energy transition day a video conference rather than all coming together in person in Berlin.  

But in this way, we have the possibility of involving far more people.  And everybody watching, everybody approaching and discussing the results of this discussion in your countries,

you will help to make this big objective a success.

Now, when we began seven years ago with the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue, we talked about the energy transition.  We talked about the Energiewende of the energy transition. 

And that is a very important point.  Today, we're talking about something different about climate neutrality.

And that's more than just a quantitative shift, it's a qualitative change.  

We believe that we can achieve climate neutrality within three decades.  And this goal is more than just a vision or an idea.

The fact that this is the case, we think we owe to the European Commission and the European Parliament.  

To all of those who were willing to work for the Green Deal to take risks, to take decisions.

And we owe it to those who in their countries in Asia, in America, in Africa have taken up this development.   

The fact that so many industrial regions†   South Korea, Japan†   have already committed to obtaining this goal. 

The fact that a country like the People's Republic of China has said that we might not manage it by 2050, but 2060 is the aim.

The fact that so many oil producing and gas producing countries have recognized that the future lies in investment in renewable, sustainable energy.  

All of this gives us ground to hope.

In particular, we are glad that the United States, that our American friends, are back on board.  They are part of the climate†   Paris Climate Agreement again and 

we are delighted that in the only they will be participating in this transition day.

But we're also particularly glad that the climate Commissioner, Secretary John Kerry, 

one of the most experienced and far sighted politicians in the United States has stated his willingness to join with us a keynote.

Heiko Maas and I have both called him on the phone.  We have talked to Jennifer Granholm, the Energy Secretary.  

And we now high important everything is happening in the United States.  All of this has to be an opportunity for us.

We now need to grab this opportunity.  We†   it has to be an opportunity to ensure that we can achieve the goal in 2050, in fact.  Now or never.  

We need to take this opportunity. We need to make†   do things properly.  We need to make agreements.

We need to set binding targets globally, regionally, and in each country.  

And it's not just a service to help the climate, it's also a service to help our economies.

ecause the future will show that it's possible to combine sustainability and climate action with prosperity.

The developing countries, like the emerging and transition economies, need to work together with the industrial countries and we need to have the courage 

to embark on the necessary changes. Germany was looked at askance when we started moving an energy transition years ago

from fossil fuels towards an energy industry that is on†   working with renewables.

Now, maybe that's possible in service based economies, but in an industrial economy like Germany, they said it was impossible.  

That's what they told us.  And today almost 50% of our energy consumption is covered by renewable energy sources in Germany.

And that's just the case even though we cannot use a lot of hydroelectric power.  We have managed, through photovoltaics, through wind, through biogas, 

through biomass, to create an energy transition which ensures energy security.  Which maintains the high quality of our energy suppliers.  Never put at risk.

And we are also experiencing that in many dozen, probably more than a hundred countries in this world, 

similar developments are continuing off shore and on shore wind energy.  And in many cases, renewable 

energy is already available at marketplaces.  Unsubsidized prices and we couldn't imagine that 20 years ago.

Therefore, the last 20 or 30 years, it's really a history that encourages us for the future that we can continue to progress along the path.  

And therefore, we need to continue to focus on technology.  We need to focus on digitalization.  We need to focus on 

an international green hydrogen economy.  We need to create the infrastructure to transport, distribute, and consume this green hydrogen.

Green hydrogen is climate neutral hydrogen.  It's been produced via renewable energies and†electrolysers in countries and regions in the world 

where the climate conditions, the weather conditions, the wind and the sun, are much more favorable than in countries like Germany 

or in other European countries in our immediate neighborhood.  And this hydrogen can be transported by ships, by pipelines. 

Just as oil and gas is transported today. And it can also help to

 

place our renewable energy based energy sector on a permanent basis 

in a way that photovoltaics and wind can't themselves.  This is an exciting and important journey because we are developing†

having developed new technologies to transport this hydrogen.  Because we need to†   to produce it as energy  efficiently as possible 

because we need energy infrastructure which ensures that it can be transported to where it's needed.

And we note that we can make climate neutral green steel by replacing the coking coal, 

which is one of the greatest emitters of carbon, of CO2 in the industry, 

we can replace it by green hydrogen.  And it works.  This is proven.  It's been confirmed.  You need to invest in new blast furnaces 

and new production technologies and then you can produce green steel, green copper, green aluminum, and much more.

It's possible to develop green chemistry on the basis of green hydrogen.  It's possible to have a couple of sector integration on the basis of green hydrogen.

Other people like Elon Musk are working on alternative propulsion concepts with battery technologies.

 In Europe alone, in the next few years, tens of thousands of jobs will be created in battery cell production facilities in gig factories.

So that the rapidly rising demand for batteries can be met.  Green hydrogen in fuel cells.

Since petrol, gasoline on the basis of renewable energies.  All of that will help us.  But in order to achieve this goal, we need not only technology and innovation, 

we also need cooperation in particular, international global cooperation.  And it's†   it can be a question of who is the strongest. 

 The question must be who is the most innovative?  Who is the most willing to go along this path and to be ahead of the field? 

With the return of the United States to the Paris Climate Agreement, we have that new window†   unique window of opportunity in order 

to bring the large industrial countries together to create a condition to ensure that the emerging economies and the developing economies will 

join in this development.  In the past, we've already invested a lot of money in the energy transition and climate action.  

Now we have the opportunity to reduce costs for the future by cooperating with each other.  By setting comparable goals and interim goals. 

I want a strong Trans Atlantic energy had partnership between the European Union on the one hand, and the United States on the other hand. 

 Not as an exclusive and privileged partnership, but rather as encouragement for others.  We can 

use this year which has become so badly with the pandemic around the world, we can use this year as a year of a new start 

for everybody for the climate and particularly for our children and our grandchildren.  

That is our obligation.  That is our mandate.


