Ladies and gentlemen, as many of you know 
from experience, transformation, whether in  

the energy sector or elsewhere, is demanding and 
risky. It requires creativity, der termination,  

a willingness to take bold moves. In other words:  

Courage. Those qualities characterize both 
of the young guests we hear from next.  

It is no exaggeration to say that our first 
young keynote speaker has been serving as a  

vocal climate justice advocate for most 
of her life. A founding member of 350  

Samoa since she was just 11 years old, she is the 
youngest winner of the prestigious Commonwealth  

Youth Award and the first ever Youth Ambassador 
of the Pacific regional environmental program.  

Fighting for the survival of her islands. It's 
a pleasure to hand over now to Brianna Fruean.
 

Talofa lava and thank you very much for having 
me this evening, this morning for you all. My  

name is Brianna Fruean, I'm a proud Pacific 
island warrior from the island of Samoa.  

I wanted to start off with a very powerful 
proverb that I would like to share from all of you  

that in my culture goes, A 
logo i tai, e logo i uta .  

Which means, "What is felt 
at sea is felt on the land."
 

This is a lesson in connection and the 
ties we have with nature and with humanity.  

When natural disasters hit our islands, we all 
feel the brunt of it. That is the reality of  

living on the front lines of the climate crisis. 
Extreme flooding, drastic drought, prevalent coral  

bleaching, recent and frequent cyclones and so 
much more is the constant reality for my people.
 

I remember a couple of years ago during Cyclone 
Gita. I was back home in Samoa. And I was in one  

of the villages where I saw one of our chiefs with 
a sheet of paper in front of a group of children.  

He was holding this and he was naming out names. 
He was taking a roll call. And it was jarring  

for me to see because I came to the realization 
that he was taking stock take of the children  

because the village was so scared that they may 
have lost someone in the floods of the night.
 

If this is something that you have not 
seen before, village chiefs taking stock  

take of children, climate change has probably 
never broken your heart the way it has mine.  

If the climate crisis doesn't break your heart, 
you've probably never really seen its true impact.  

The climate crisis is humanities one, it's a 
humanity issue, and it can only be solved by  

the power of humanity. The climate justice we 
need is more than just climate action. Climate  

justice ensures that the needs of people are put 
first. And in order to do this, we need a just  

transition to renewable energy. A transition that 
centers workers, communities and civil society.
 

We know that the climate crisis is an emergency 
which demands rapid and far reaching action to  

transform our societies away from the reliance 
on fossil fuels to avoid some of the worsening  

impacts of climate change. But at the same time, 
the climate crisis is embedded within the global  

context of growing inequality, deep 
poverty and significant unemployment.  

So, we cannot talk about climate justice without 
addressing the intersections the crisis has with  

already existing global and social issues. That's 
why I can say that Indigenous justice is climate  

justice, racial justice is climate justice, union 
justice is climate justice. Anything that puts  

people and power over profit is climate justice. 
So, it's more than just action, it's justice.  

I ask you that throughout this conference, 
throughout these conversations as you think and  

discuss and act on what is needed to transition 
to renewable energy that you remember people.
 

After all, all of us are connected. We're 
all a part of humanity. And as my people say,  

A logo i tai, e logo i uta    what is felt at 
sea is felt at land. We are all connected.
 

Thank you so much to Brianna Fruean. And ladies 
and gentlemen, courage and determination enabled  

our second young keynote speaker to launch the 
Rise UP Climate movement that is now amplifying  

African voices in the climate debate. An 
activist devoted to raising awareness of the  

dangers of climate change, led the save Congo rain 
forest and successful working with local schools  

in her home country, Uganda. It's a pleasure to 
welcome Fridays for Future's Vanessa Nakate.
 

Thank you very much. My name is Vanessa Nakate. 
I'm from Kampala, Uganda. A country that has one  

of the fastest changing climates in the world. 
Historically, Africa is responsible for only 3%  

of global emissions. And yet Africans are already 
suffering some of the most brutal epochs fueled by  

the climate crisis. Rapidly intense, and devested 
floods and withering droughts. Many Africans have  

lost their lives. And have lost their homes, funds 
and businesses. The droughts and floods have left  

nothing behind for the people. Nothing except for 
pain, agony, suffering, starvation and death.
 

I was asked to speak as a youth climate activist 
here at today's Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.  

Brianna and I were each initially promised 5 
minutes to make our arguments. The organizers  

of the event cut our time to 4 minutes. Then to 
3.5 minutes. They also insisted on seeing the text  

of our speeches ahead of time. They also 
repeatedly instructed us not to name or shame  

leaders that would be taking part in this Summit.
You should not ask activists to come and speak at  

your events so you can feel better and then try to 
censor them. You should not slash the time to tell  

their stories. It is the leaders who have failed 
us. Not the young people. It is the leaders who  

have ignored the scientists and the science. It 
is the leaders who have time and time again have  

failed to treat the climate crisis like a crisis.
This is not naming and shaming. This  

is telling the truth. Why are you 
so afraid of hearing the truth?  

Did any of the political leaders speaking here 
today have to present their speeches for preview?  

Did any of them have their allotted speaking 
time cut by a third? And while people in  

Africa are suffering and dying on the front 
lines of the climate crisis, why is the main  

response from the leaders of the developed 
countries? More investment in fossil fuels.  

To the governments, banks and investors who 
continue to fund the digging up and finding of  

fossil fuel in Africa, there is no 
future in the fossil fuel industry.  

The coal and oil is responsible for 
killing almost 9 million people every year.  

And aside from the destruction you are causing, 
your investment does not even make sense.
 

The International Energy Agency is predicting 
that $300 billion of fossil fuel assets will  

likely be stranded as the world wakes 
up to the threat of the climate crisis.  

The first thing when you find yourself in a hole 
is to start digging. Many of the leaders gathered  

here today have received praise for announcing 
that human kind is facing a climate emergency.  

Now it's time for you to stop talking 
and start treating this crisis  

like a crisis. I ask each and every leader here 
today to stop censoring the voices of activists.  

To start listening to the scientists and the 
science and stop investing in fossil fuels  

now and immediately. We cannot eat coal. 
And we cannot drink oil. Thank you.
 

Vanessa Nakate, thank you very much 
for your words. We have heard them.  

And you and Brianna have made very, very clear to 
us that the transition to cleaner energy systems,  

the process of decarbonization, absolutely 
must be coupled with justice. So, we will take  

your remarks with us as we discuss with 
policymakers. Thank you very much to both of you.


