The global shift towards an intensifying 
electrification of functions and lifestyles  

has gathered considerable momentum in past 
years. It is considered today to be a mega  

trend of the new century. One that accelerates 
the energy transition but also involves some  

risks. This session explores the limits to 
mass electrification. How about industrialized  

and developing countries? And can electricity 
replace today's heating and cooling technologies? 

Your question, ladies and gentlemen. The 
commercial availability of a growing range  

of low emission technologies puts electricity 
at the forefront of decarbonization efforts.  

But does that make the future all electric as is 
sometimes clim or d oes it overstate electricity's  

contribution and risk obscuring complexities and 
trade-offs? Those are some of the questions that  

we want to explore with four expert guests. And 
as always, our timeframe is quite tight, so I'm  

going to keep the intros short and also ask all of 
our speakers to please keep your answers as brief  

as you can, two minutes would be very helpful 
because we really don't have much more than 20  

minute, all told, for this session. And I'm very 
pleased to welcome professor Chems-Eddine Chitour.  

Also Claudia Kemfert is with us, the head 
of the Transportation and Environment at  

DIW. Great to see you again, Claudia 
Kemfert. Alix Chambris is joining us,  

Vice President of the group Of Public Affairs 
and sustainability at a group headquartered  

here in Germany. I'm pleased to welcome Dr. Alan 
Finkel. Great to see you again. Let me begin  

with an overview and ask you all to look 
at the reality behind the electrification  

hype. I'll start out with Minister Chitour. 
Algeria is one of the big African countries  

and important natural gas exporter, of 
course, and also has enormous potential  

for solar power production and export of that 
power. So do you think that by 2050 Algeria could  

switch its energy model which here to for has been 
based on natural gas and over to green hydrogen?

Claudia, could you give us a brief overview 
of the status and trends of the electrical  

usage in developing and established countries  

to help us understand this great shift 
to electrification we are talking about? 

Yes, of course. Melinda, great to see you again. 
I'm happy to be here. Just to briefly explain,  

the main future energy consumption will 
be electric with few exceptions. Indeed  

the new oil. If we want to keep global warming 
limited below 2 degrees, the global greenhouse  

gas emissions must fall to zero as quickly 
as possible. That's zero, not net zero.  

So renewable energy is the only energy that 
meets all the requirements that is emission-free,  

low-risk, available everywhere and useable 
today, decentralized and cost effective.  

The current nuclear fossil energy system is not 
compatible with environmental goals. It's risky.  

We need renewable water, wind, 
storage or renewable energy system  

for everything, while also addressing 
the non?energy emissions. So,  

the transition involves electrification 
of most everything. That is vehicles,  

heating, building and cooking, and industrial 
processes that we will talk about here also today.  

So, what we need is an electricity entirely 
provided with wind, water, geothermal and  

solar. And we estimate due to the efficiency of 
the electricity of contribution and other factors,  

such electrification will reduce worldwide 
energy needs over 50%. So although overall  

energy requirements will decline, the electricity 
requirements will be about 50% greater than today.  

So the more energy will be electricity. And the 
biggest challenge in the industrialized countries  

is to completely decarbonize the economy 
and implement the energy shift towards 100%  

renewable energy system. As a fossil nuclear 
energy system dominates in almost all countries,  

there is a long way to go, and we are running 
out of time for climate protection reasons. And  

renewable energies have many advantages. The 
costs are continuously decreasing. They are  

decentralized and can be used anywhere. So solar 
energy, for example, can be installed on all  

house roofs. This is particularly attractive 
for developing countries. Renewable energies  

avoid fossil energy wars and also 
nuclear weapons and the energy transition  

based on a 100% renewable energy is the 
best peace project we have on earth. 

But green electricity must be used wherever 
possible. In the mobility sector by strengthening  

the public transport and individual transport, and 
also buildings with heat pumps in combination with  

consistent energy savings. So, electricity?first 
is the model. Energy?saving and eliminating  

energy waste is also crucial. There are only a few 
areas where electricity cannot be used directly.  

That is heavy transport outside of trolley 
tracks where green hydrogen or synthetic fuels,  

that means fuels produced from green electricity, 
will be used. And just as, for example, shipping  

and transport as well. And heavy industry, 
especially the production of steel and metals  

where coal GHB have to be replaced. And 
green hydrogen will have to be used there,  

too, but it's really important that we talk about 
green hydrogen. That it's really green. That it's  

produced with green electricity. Because all 
other colors are either too high in emissions  

or use unsafe processes such as carbon capture 
and storage and thus environmental hazards.  

Inefficient high costs exclude high risks from 
enormous and expansive technologies such as  

nuclear. So, hydrogen has no role to play in 
the heating sector or in cars, but hydrogen  

must be produced with green electricity as it 
loses a lot of energy in the production and  

loses process. Hydrogen is not the new oil. So, 
renewable electricity is the new oil. Thanks.

Thank you very much. Let me go 
straight to Alix Chambris. So we just  

heard there from Claudia Kemfert, yes,  

the shift is happening. We're looking at a mostly 
if not all?electric future. What does that mean  

for you in the heating industry? Will that change 
transition strategies in the building sector?

Thank you. So, we agree that electrification 
will play a huge role in helping us to reach  

the Net Zero targets in buildings. So we 
will see an increase electrification of space  

heating and heat pumps for sure will be the big 
winner of the energy transition in buildings.  

Yet come to the title, panacea or headache? 
And we are convinced that we need a balance,  

a mix of clean gas in buildings by 2050 
to optimize energy system costs and  

also take the people side into account. So let 
me summarize the three reasons why we believe  

that green gasses will still play a role and must 
play a role in buildings in the Net Zero economy.  

The first reason is that buildings are extremely 
heterogeneous and they're a very hard to abate  

sector. And one solution does not fit all the 
different building types and the taste of people.  

So we need to add as many decarbonizing options 
as possible to meet the Net Zero by 2050. The  

more options on the way, the higher the likeliness 
that we meet the target. Another reason is social  

acceptance. A one?size?fits?all doesn't fit the 
people's preferences and people's choice and,  

again, financial power. And finally, 
the most important reason why we believe  

that a fuller, complete electrification is not the 
right way. It is the energy system perspective. So  

we have to remember that space heating, especially 
in central Europe, a colder region, is extremely  

seasonal, and in the wintertime, the heating 
not only increases close to three?fold or more,  

meaning that you need to supply this heat demand 
in the wintertime where often you have sometimes  

no wind and often no sun. So there is really this 
energy security approach to have in mind. And  

allowing a share of gas to co?exist in buildings 
by 2050 reduces the system costs. It reduces the  

need for backup generation capacity. It reduce 
?? it optimizes the size of the electricity grid.  

And overall just to take the example of Germany, 
it was calculated you could save on a yearly basis  

11 billion Euros just by allowing a smart dose 
of gas to exist next to electricity in 2050.

Thank you very much. Let me go over now to Alan 
Finkel. We have a bit of a debate here so far  

as to whether green gas and electrification 
are compliments or in a sense competitors.  

Claudia Kemfert telling us that there are some 
sectors where green gas, green hydrogen really  

won't make much of an impact, and I wonder if you 
can resolve this or at least where you would cast  

your vote on this question. What 
role is hydrogen set to play in  

Australia's energy transition and how do 
you see it playing off with electrification?

Melinda, thank you, and thank you for the 
invitation to be here. I don't have any doubt that  

it's a false dichotomy to play off electrification 
against green gas or green hydrogen. We need all  

the weapons at our disposal in order to ensure 
the transition. Australia's been doing that  

certainly as, of course, Germany and other 
countries. In Australia, we've embarked on a  

fairly remarkable energy transition, beginning 
with the electricity sector. We see that as  

the most important place to stay ?? to start, 
and we've been deploying at record levels of  

variable renewable energy electricity. Solar 
and wind last year. Approximately 26% of all  

of our electricity was generated from solar 
and wind. And we're very pleased with the fact  

that we now have the highest installed solar 
generation capacity per person in the world by  

quite a large margin and we have the highest 
percentage of solar rooftops in the world.  

We expect this transition in the electricity 
sector to continue pace. Investors are keen.  

The commitment to eliminating emissions in 
the electricity sector makes sense because  

clean electricity will be key to successful 
decarbonization of the other big sectors,  

as we've heard, such as transport, 
building heating and industrial processes.  

And collectively, the use of fossil 
fuels today for all of these purposes  

rent rates three?quarters of the global greenhouse 
gas emissions, so replacing fossil fuel use with  

clean electricity and clean hydrogen is the way 
to start. It's the best return for our effort. But  

even though the electricity is almost like magic, 
it's not always the most convenient way to deliver  

energy. And sometimes we need a high?density 
fuel, and I would argue that the role for hydrogen  

and its derivatives will be significant in the 
heavy?duty long?haul trucks and trains and ships.  

For Australia and for other countries, the ability 
to trade renewable energy between the continents  

in the same way that we have been trading fossil 
fuel energy between the continents, that ability  

to trade across the planet will need a way to 
package renewable energy for shipping. And, of  

course, in these cases, the solution is hydrogen 
and its derivatives such as clean ammonia.  

In 2019, the Australian government released our 
National Hydrogen Strategy, and the congratulate  

Germany for the release of yours last year. Our 
strategy envisions multiple roles for hydrogen  

in Australia's energy transition. Domestically, 
we will use hydrogen for industrial feed stocks  

and for heating. We'll blend it into the gas 
networks, and we'll use it for long?distance  

heavy?duty transport. But, of course, as 
an export, we will build on our willingness  

to take on huge projects. Become a hydrogen 
powerhouse, shipping sunshine to the world. 

We're not stopping there, though. You need 
to use every tool available. So, last year  

I had the honor of leading the development 
of the Australia's low emissions technology  

roadmap. And in that is our first installment. We 
have prioritized five low?emissions technologies  

and set financial stretch goals to 
focus investments by the governments  

and the private sector to get the costs of these 
technologies down. So, one example, clean hydrogen  

is actually part of the low?emissions technology 
roadmap and the focus on reducing the cost  

to under 2 dollars Australian per kilogram, 
which would be under $1.50 US per kilogram.  

Our other five priorities such as electricity from 
storage and zero?emission steel. So, to finish,  

let me say that it's clear, Australia, we 
see clean hydrogen as key to the transition  

to zero a missions across the economy, but as 
a compliment to electrification. And together  

clean electricity and clean 
hydrogen, indeed, are the panacea.

Thank you very much. And I know that Australia is, 
in fact, involved in a green hydrogen cooperation  

with Germany. So, many thanks to you. Ladies 
and gentlemen, we are really actually already  

out of time. This is a very short session. 
I'd like to ask each of you in one phrase,  

literally less than 30 seconds each, to tell 
me what you see as the biggest challenge to  

this complimentarity between electrification and 
green hydrogen? You've said we need to use all the  

tools in the toolbox. What's the single biggest 
challenge. One phrase only. Claudia Kemfert?

Green electricity technology is valuable 
and must be used everywhere. Hydrogen is the  

champagne and only used for special occasions.
Dr. Crane: Thank you very much. Alix Chambris?

Yes. So, we agree that green electricity 
and green gas, especially hydrogen,  

are the panacea of the energy transition, but 
what we saw the biggest challenge is to secure  

the space heaters in the buildings and global 
building stocks. So changing gas mix. And for us  

ensuring hydrogen revenues of 
space heaters is a no regret move.

Thank you very much. Dr. Finkel, if you would.

For complex economy we need to have multiple 
solutions at disposal. We shouldn't pick winners.  

We have to focus on carbon dioxide 
into the atmosphere rather than  

choosing and focusing on favorite 
technologies. It's emissions that count.

Thank you very much to all three 
of you for this very succinct,  

very, very interesting exchange. I appreciate you  

being with us and also your patience with 
our very short timeframe. Many thanks.


