And I'm joined now by two of our 
winners. Fermin Koop from Argentina and  

Kennedy Nyavaya from Zimbabwe. Congratulations  

to the both of you and thank you so much 
for joining us for this studio session. 
 

Thank you so much. 
I want to get right to the questions  

so that we can talk about some of the ideas you 
had. We'll start with Mr. Koop. The state of the  

energy transition in your country, and what did 
your BETD Fellow Competition piece focus on? 
 

Thanks for your question. It's a pleasure to 
be here, first of all,. Thanks for the invite.  

I've been following the conference. It's been 
really interesting. So my piece focused on the  

energy transition in Latin America. The argument 
was mainly that renewables could be used as part  

of that energy transition in the context of 
COVID?19 as a way to boost economies in Latin  

America. Latin America is rich with significant 
resources on wind and solar energy, biomass,  

geo thermal energy. Still not many 
of those resources are being used.  

We have seen development in countries such as the 
case of Chile which has gone over a significant  

energy transition over the past few years to leave 
behind its coal?based facilities. There has been  

significant policy which has metrics now with 
almost 100% base renewables. The same is true  

with Costa Rica. There are still countries that 
are having more difficulties to roll into that  

transition, such as the case of Argentina or 
the case of Colombia, which are heavily based  

on fossil fuels and don't have clear plans ahead 
to actually go through a proper energy transition.  

One of the reasons behind this is actually 
the fact that there are obstacles in the way.  

One of them is fossil fuel subsidies, which I know 
is one of the topics that has been highlighted  

throughout the conference. Many countries 
investing millions or even billions of local funds  

to subsidize the fossil fuel sector. Plus we need 
actual grids to be set up across the region for  

the energy to be able to be moved from one place 
to another. For the ones that are not familiarized  

with the region, most of the solar and wind 
resources in Latin America are actually far away  

from the main urban centers, so the energy has to 
be moved from one area to another. This requires  

investments on grids that are highly expensive 
but are highly necessary as well, and we hope that  

this will be one of the developments that we will 
see in the next few years across the region. 
 

Thank you, Fermin Koop. And same question 
to you, Mr. Nyavaya, the state of the energy  

transformation in your country and what the 
focus was of your Fellow Competition piece. 
 

Thank you so much for the chance to present 
and talk at this great conference. Yeah,  

as Mr. Koop was saying, it's been a great 
conference. You know, a lot of information,  

a lot of ?? it's very encouraging to see 
people from all over the globe, you know,  

this talk around issues of a proper transition 
into cleaner energy. So my piece was pretty much  

a series of three articles. 
	
Goals  

with pictures and ?? energy transition and how 
it's good on paper and the renewable energy policy  

is perfect on paper, but it has been hindered by 
certain issues from ?? in terms of implementation.  

So in terms of issues like corruption, issues like 
complacency, and issues generally about ?? 
	
 

Mr. Nyavaya, I'm afraid that 
we may be losing your signal.  

Let's go ahead and see if we can reconnect  

to you. 
	
Mr. Nyavaya,  

I'd like to see if we can reconnect to you, 
but right now I'd like to go back to Mr. Koop.  

Can you briefly give us outlines 
for the transition in your country  

or in Latin America. 
Hello? Can you hear me now? 
 

Mr. Koop, why don't you go ahead. 
Yeah, thank you. Summing up on the points I made,  

Latin America in the next five years, or looking 
long term, ten years. I think it is important  

to have a significant energy transition. We should 
have a significant energy transition because as I  

said we are seeing some countries that are 
lagging behind such as Argentina, Colombia,  

Brazil in some aspects as well. In order to 
do that, we need countries where governments  

structurally understand they need to leave 
behind fossil fuels and they need to enter in the  

international energy transition. This requires 
not subsidizing any more or at least reducing  

significantly the subsidies for fossil fuels 
will play a big, big role across Latin America.  

This requires policies from government to actually 
support further the development of renewables.  

I know COVID actually ?? the COVID context that 
we are seeing around the world makes this a little  

bit more difficult. Latin America has been one of 
the regions most affected in the world. And not  

to say actually the region most affected in the 
world due to the economic crisis brought by the  

pandemic. This makes it very difficult to actually 
roll out more renewables. We should keep this in  

mind. There have been many plans in Mexico and 
Argentina, for example, that were pushed ?? that  

were delayed because of the economic crisis that 
some of the countries in the region are facing.  

But still I think our countries should think 
of an energy transition and think of doing the  

energy transition as part of the new industries. 
Such as Argentina, Brazil and Mexico that have  

been working over the last six months. Now before 
the actual Climate Summit in Glasgow. So I expect  

that countries will be making more commitments 
regarding the energy transition as well. 
 

Thank you very much, Mr. Koop. I think 
unfortunately I'm not sure if Mr. Nyavaya  

is still in our ?? I'm hearing we're having 
quite a bit of difficulty with his connection.  

Although now I can see him again. Mr. 
Nyavaya, if you can hear me, I'd love  

you to tell us a little bit about the outlook 
for the energy transition in Zimbabwe. 
 

Thank you so much. Can you hear me? 
I can. 
 

Can you hear me now? Sorry. Okay. Generally, 
looking at the outlook of ?? rather, from my  

own point of view on how things are happening, 
you know, I think as I mentioned earlier, very  

good points in terms of the energy transition that 
it wants to pursue, but now when we look at ?? now  

when we look at the issue of implementation, 
there are still a few issues and I'm still,  

you know, a country which really wants to ?? 
	
Renewable energies.  

Or pivoting from coal extraction, for example. 
This has caused a significant problem.  

Countries that are extracting coal. So, at the 
end of the day, you start to think there is a  

disconnect between the policies and the issue of 
implementation. But ultimately it is my hope that  

the powers that be can take advantage of the 
potential that is there. More than 300 days of  

sun in the year and solar could be another way. 
Hydroelectricity is another way. These are all  

ways that we can ?? if we're going to be a 
part of this great energy transition. 
	
 

We feel the impact of climate 
change, you know ?? as  

a third?world country, we are feeling the 
dire impact to actually pursue global energy,  

not only on paper, but also physically 
Mr. Nyavaya, so glad you stuck with us. Apologies  

to our listeners. We are having a little bit of 
a technical difficulty with that. I'd like to  

congratulations all of the winners, especially the 
two with me, Kennedy Nyavaya and Fermin Koop.


