It is my absolute pleasure to introduce 
Ika Krismantari and Pei Hua Yu. Hello,  

congratulations and welcome to both of you.
 

Thank you so much for being with us 
today. I would like to get right to it.  

I would like you to answer the question of the 
state of the energy transition in your country is,  

and along with that, what the focus of your BETD 
media competition focus is. Ika Krismantari,  

please start.
Allow me to introduce myself.  

I'm Ika, and I'm the head of the Conversation 
Indonesia. And renewable energy has become  

my on obsession. Why is in an obsession? The 
way that the government is working on renewable  

energy is a little bit puzzling. So, we are 
one of the fourth most populous country,  

260 million people and the largest economy 
in Southeast Asia. And has abundant  

energy resources. But the problem    sorry. And 
after that, you can see that why it has so many  

abundant energy because it's a tropical country. 
We are blessed with all year round sunshine.  

And we also are a country with more than 17,000 
   and we do have plenty of water resources  

across for hydro forms. And we have I think 
40% of our geothermal potential in the world.  

But the problem is that the vulnerable energy 
remains untapped. It's kind of like puzzling.  

It has become a problem since I was an energy 
journalist back then. Where the government set up  

like a fund to increase the 
energy use to 22% by 2025. 

But as we know from this, we can see we 
are nowhere near. Our energy, for example,  

it only accounts for less than 1% at the 
moment. And it's mostly because    so,  

this is why the thing that we also try to reveal 
in my thoughts. I collaborate and we understand.  

The reason is because the emissions policymakers 
focus on the 40% energy. Because we find that  

they don't see the benefit of the renewable 
energy. Because they only see that they can get  

the money from the fossil energy. So, it's    it's 
no wonder why it accounts for almost more than 50%  

in our national energy portfolio. And we 
also discuss in our report that during the  

pandemic when many other countries see a silver 
lining where they see the uptick in the use of  

renewable energy. In our report, we found that 
the    is sort of like we have the energy dream.  

Because we do have some plans    we have some 
plans to ensure some new policy to promote energy  

use. But somehow because the pandemic effort 
has been put on hold. And because government  

is still focusing on handling the pandemic.
And another thing    maybe the good part is we  

found inspiring stories from individuals. Where we 
find people who are in this effort, they install  

solar panels in their houses and offices but 
themselves. So, this is like we try to investigate  

the role of civil society in supporting 
these green energy costs. And so, I believe  

this offers some kind of like a hope for our 
energy despite the government's poor efforts.  

And 100% is for the project. I saw some of them, 
just in case you are interested to hear it now. 

We are interested. Thank you 
so much for that. I would like  

to ask Pei Hua I can't about 
her contributions. You are from  

Taiwan, but you have been reporting on 
China. Is that correct? Oh, Pei Hua,  

I can't hear you. Perhaps you are muted. 
Now I can hear you, great, thank you. 

Yes, I'm currently based in Taiwan. And I have 
publications around the world. And my beat in  

journalism is the Chinese infrastructure and 
investment projects outside China. And so,  

I think reporting on China's global engagements 
is interesting because the topic is complex  

and consequential. And China is never a single 
entity or a coherent group in which every person  

and corporation acts the same. So, that's why. 
There are many    I found there are many stories,  

interesting stories, to develop in this beat. And 
so, here I would like to share about the role of  

China in the energy sectors overseas.
So, in terms of the coal projects,  

Chinese financial institute together contributes 
the largest share of financing for coal powered  

projects around the world. By both the South 
Korean and Japanese counterparts according to  

the global finance tracker. Therefore, most 
of the efforts by the global civil society  

of the nations that work on climate issues has 
been focusing on hastening the Chinese as well  

as the South Korean and Japanese institutes to 
ship away from coal. In terms of the field of  

renewable energy technology, China has leading 
companies in the solar and wind energy sectors. 

However, this does not mean that Chinese 
corporations dominate the entire sectors.  

So, let's take a look at the solar 
technology closely. According to the  

recent research by Green Peace East Asia, Chinese 
corporations are leading players in the silicon  

material. Silicon wafers, cells, and 
they're offering many activities. However,  

most of the Chinese companies still lack 
the advantage in much of the downstream  

activities such as power plant operations 
and maintenance and PV panel recycling.  

Therefore, when we look at Indonesia, a country 
where developing renewable projects remain  

difficult, most of the existing solar and wind 
projects are run by Chinese corporations instead. 

The largest projects are constructed by 
Singaporean and European countries with a longer  

history of developing projects or by state owned 
companies with support from their governments.  

And so, the article I work on    I write 
   I write a story in the Chinese language  

published in a magazine called Energy Observer. 
And the article is    the article target's energy  

professional is in China. The article provides 
details about why it is difficult to develop  

renewable energy projects in Indonesia. And 
the conditions of the existing successful  

renewable projects and the regular moves 
that we can watch in 2021. That's it. 

Thank you so much, Pei Hua. We are almost to 
our break, ladies and gentlemen, but I want  

to stay with our two young journalists before 
we do. I want to ask you both, can you give us  

any more insights on sort of 
the outlook for what's happening  

with the energy transition in China and Indonesia, 
Pei Hua back to you? Any further insights? 

Yeah, in the last year, we have seen increasing 
awareness in the East Asian region about the  

importance to ship away from coal and to invest in 
renewables. Recent example is that China has told  

Bangladesh it will not fund coal mines and 
polluting power plants. In this year, it's a  

fact that the Chinese government and financial 
institutes and the Chinese companies will face  

higher peer pressure to hasten their    their 
   away from coal. And so, we can see if more  

institutes    Chinese institutes and policymakers 
will follow what their policies and actions are. 

Thank you. Let's go to Ika Krismantari. Can 
you give some insights in terms of what's  

happening with the outlook for the 
energy transition in Indonesia? Ika? 

What really happens, actually, at the 
moment. Because like the global    like  

the most important thing for them now is defining 
it. As you know, the inertia has started in  

places in Southeast Asia and the higher poverty 
rates. The government is almost completely there.  

And we will see what the changes will happen 
from above. What we can see from our report,  

we can see that this change is starting 
to happen here. And it has their own  

awareness to the safe environment, you 
know? So, we think maybe that's just  

a lot of money. So, as far as the inertia, just 
to make sure that we can breathe fresh air in  

the future. So, I think that's sort of like 
a hope that, you know, that we can rely on. 

And I can hope as a journalist I will hope that 
I can work on this issue. Maybe not at the moment  

where it's almost like a mission impossible 
right now. And I have    I can keep you up on  

my reports and my analysis and we can keep the 
discussion going. Because, you know, it's not  

less important than pandemic, actually. Because 
it's also important for the future of our country.  

And the fate of our    is on, yeah. On how we 
need to work on renewable energy, I believe. 

Ika, Pei Hua, those are inspirational words. 
Congratulations to the both of you. I also hope  

that there's lots of fresh air for everyone to 
breathe all over the globe and we   in the future.


