Our first speaker is a policymaker who has 
recently taken on the Herculean challenge at  

the time that she was sworn into office, she said 
that while she didn't want to, quote, unquote,  

sugarcoat the challenges 
involved in transitioning,  

clean energy does offer huge opportunities 
and not simply displaced old industry jobs,  

but, in fact, create millions of new ones for 
all. And that, of course, gets back to a theme  

we've heard again and again, that the transition 
will only succeed if it is a just transition. So,  

let me now hand over with great honor to the 
Secretary of the US Department of Energy,  

the former governor of the US state of 
Michigan, Jennifer Granholm. Welcome. 
 

Thank you so much. Thank you, Melinda, and hello 
everybody. I am so excited to actually deliver my  

very first ever international address as Secretary 
of Energy in the US to you all, so let's have at  

it. As President the Biden announced last 
month at the Munich Security Conference,  

America is back. We are back in the Paris 
Agreement. We're back at the table with our  

partners across the Atlantic. We're ready to go. 
We're all?in on tackling the climate emergency  

with you. President Biden has put climate 
priorities front and center in both his domestic  

and foreign policy agendas. As you know and as 
you've heard from, he's appointed John Kerry,  

a brilliant statesman and one of the architects 
of the Paris Agreement to be the Special Enjoy  

on Climate. He's got the incredible Gina McCarthy 
on the White House side. He has a fantastic new  

Energy Secretary, which would be me, and he's 
laid out a bold agenda which will set America  

on an irreversible path on the goals we all 
share, Net Zero carbon emissions by 2050. I know  

the US has said no in the past to this 
fight many times over the past four years,  

but, my friends, today is a new day. We are 
saying yes. Yes to clean energy innovation. Yes  

to working with our allies. Yes to putting our 
resources on the table alongside yours. Because  

we know that no one country can solve the climate 
crisis alone. We share this challenge. We share  

these goals. Together we're going to share the 
solutions. I cannot wait to get to work with my  

counterparts in Germany and the European Union and 
governments around the world to make this happen.  

Let me be clear, though, we are playing catch?up. 
We recognize that. We approach this with humility.  

The US may make different choices in how 
we approach our own energy transition.  

You and other EU parties have already made 
some incredible progress. Germany has slashed  

greenhouse gas emissions by 40%, 
below 1990 levels, supercharged  

your clean energy output. Last year, Germany 
generated almost 50% of their electricity through  

renewables, more than all fossil fuels combined. 
That is amazing and that is a path we want  

to follow. So, those are the kind of results 
we need to replicate here in the US. 
 

So, there's one thing you should know about me 
anyway. I am a totally impatient person. I'm  

impatient for the results here. I know you are 
as well. Our administration has less than four  

guaranteed years. That is ?? actually, I have 
a sticker on here on my computer which tells  

me how many days we have left. We have 966 days 
left. If you take out weekends. To do so much.  

We have to add hundreds and hundreds of 
gigawatts of renewable energy to our grid  

in the US. We have to make that grid more 
reliable and resilient. We have to beef up  

our transmission network so that we can move clean 
energy around the country and connect centers of  

renewable power to centers of high demand. We 
have to protect our critical infrastructure,  

our energy infrastructure against hackers and bad 
actors. We have to work on ways to remove CO2 from  

our fossil fuels like natural gas. We have to 
stop methane lakes and emissions from pipelines.  

I'm sure all of this sounds familiar. I know 
these are all on your to?do lists as well.  

So we're talking about nothing short of a global 
transformation of the energy sector here, but if  

we can pull it off, these investments are going to 
deliver so much more than our climate goals. If we  

can pull this off, this energy transformation 
is going to be an economic revolution putting  

millions of people to work harnessing clean 
energy. We can launch the communities that have  

been left behind into a greener future. We can 
give them hope. We can make good on the moral bets  

to those who have borne the brunt of our world's 
pollution and are now suffering the devastating  

impacts of a warming planet. All the while we 
can do this while creating jobs for workers that  

will be in demand for decades to come. That is 
a just transition, giving people work and hope,  

and this is what President Biden means when he 
says that we are going to build back better. 
 

These challenges are vast, but I have no doubt 
that we can meet them if we take them on together,  

and it all starts by doubling down here at 
the Department of Energy on researching,  

on developing, and especially on deploying the 
clean energy technologies of the future. It's one  

of my top priorities as Energy Secretary. I know 
the United States needs all of the big players  

on the international stage in our corner. Because 
when we partner with our friends around the world,  

we redefine what's possible. Just think about what 
our collaborations with Germany alone have already  

yielded. Pre?COVID, thousands of German 
researchers would come to work as guests  

at our Department of Energy's national labs 
every year. US researchers would go do the same  

at German institutions. By working together, we 
have made groundbreaking discoveries across the  

basic energy sciences, nuclear physics, particle 
physics, so much more. I mean, if we can push the  

boundaries of particle physics, imagine what we 
can do when we put our heads together on clean  

energy solutions. So, now we're ready to engage in 
the highest levels of bilateral and multilateral  

cooperation with any nation willing to work with 
us. We have so many problems to work through.  

The Clean Energy Ministerial. IEA collaboration 
technology programs, the G7, the G20, just to name  

a few. All of these need to build momentum to get 
success in November at the Glasgow Climate Summit.  

So, we'll do our part to get that clean 
energy train moving with President Biden's  

Global Climate Leaders Summit on April 22nd. 
We can use all of these events to unleash one  

of the greatest tools we have, which is the 
power and innovation of our private sectors. 
 

Both American and German companies are global 
leaders in deploying clean tech solutions  

in areas like hydrogen and batteries and energy 
efficiency. Here at the Department of Energy,  

we're putting money in the hands of companies that 
can bring these solutions to life. For example,  

today, today we're announcing a $24.5 million 
opportunity in funding to support advances  

in manufacturing for flow batteries and conductor 
materials for next?generation power lines. That's  

going to help us to modernize the grid. 
It's going to create opportunities for new  

clean energy jobs. And those are the kinds of 
investments that can help us fuel the Net Zero  

carbon transformation so we can meet the goals of 
the Paris Agreement in the spirit of collaboration  

and cooperation and coordination with 
our European partners. The potential  

is endless, and the upside is obvious. The 
upside is the prosperity and the promise  

that our people so deserve. Because what do you 
need to power with these clean energy solutions?  

You need millions and millions of jobs with 
good pay and good benefits for all. With all  

these new technologies, we're going to scale up 
together that we can create enormous opportunities  

for companies and workers to seize on both 
sides of the Atlantic. These investments,  

the investments of companies, the private sector, 
are going to lead to explosive job growth and  

blow open the doors to whole new parts of the 
global economy. Reports estimate that just the  

initial commitments of the largest 21 developed 
?? developing countries under the Paris Agreement,  

just the initial commitments created a $23 
trillion market investment opportunity by 2030.  

$23 trillion is huge. All requiring the building 
of the products that will reduce CO2 emissions and  

generate clean power. I guarantee you when people 
see the clean energy market skyrocketing, they're  

going to run to get on board. This is ?? this is 
?? it's an amazing moment. It is our opportunity  

to make sure that those benefits reach communities 
that have often felt unseen, unheard, forgotten.  

And I know we share the same vision here of this 
just, equitable energy transition that brings  

everybody along. Together we can show coal and 
oil and gas?dependent communities in our countries  

the path towards sustainable and carbon?neutral 
economies, a path that still protects their  

economic growth. Together we can lift up 
disadvantaged communities that are living on the  

front lines of climate change. We can help them 
find their way toward cleaner and brighter futures  

and help them take the strain, frankly, off their 
wallets. That's the promise that the clean energy  

transformation holds for this world. As the 
world's leading voices in this space, we all  

have to work hand?in?glove and put our nations' 
considerable resources behind this effort. 
 

Together, we're going to dream up and deploy 
the big solutions that this crisis demands,  

solutions that drive the economic growth 
and prosperity of our workers. Solutions  

that kick start this global transformation 
and aim us full speed ahead toward our Net  

Zero carbon future. This is our moment, Folx. It 
is a single moment in the grand arc of history,  

but it is our moment nonetheless. As President 
Biden has said, America is back, and together  

with all of you there is nothing that we can't do. 
Thank you so much for having me. Let's do this. 
 

Madam Secretary, thank you so very much for 
this very upbeat and inspiring impulse. 


