Citizen energy projects increase overall 
support for the energy transition and can  

be important drivers for regional development. 
However, regulations vary between countries  

and citizen energy projects are confronted 
with differing obstacles and opportunities.  

What is the potential of energy communities 
and how can they be best supported?

Welcome, everyone. In this session, we want to 
take a look at a few actual projects and their  

impact on regional development, and we also want 
to ask what kind of policy support is necessary  

to help such initiatives flourish. And I will 
introduce our very esteemed guests. All of them  

women, by the way, in this panel on citizen 
energy. In just a moment. But first,  

I do want to ask the audience to respond to our 
polling question. And I see that they ?? some  

of you are already doing so. So if you are a 
registered user, dear members of the audience,  

then please look at our Slido window on our 
livestream, and there you will find our polling  

question. And the polling question is this. 
Do you think there should be more public and  

regulatory support to citizen energy worldwide? 
At the moment, the yeses have it, but please do  

keep voting and we're going to come back and take 
another look at the results after I introduce our  

guests. It's my pleasure to welcome Tinne van 
der Straten. Also with us is Tri Mumpuni, she is  

Executive Director and founder of the People 
Center Business and economic institute IBECA,  

which has successful and 
installed more than 80 solar  

projects across Indonesia. It's great to have 
you with us. Thank you so much. And also with us  

is Myriam Castanie, she's been working with island 
communities in the EU. Let's look back at our  

results. They look pretty straightforward 
indeed. 100% of those voted say we do need  

more public and regulatory support for citizen 
energy. And now we look at our panelists' take.  

Starting with an overview of the benefits and the 
challenges of citizenry. Dear ladies, I'm going to  

ask you, unfortunately, I have to ask it in every 
session, to be quite concise with your answers.  

If you can, please try to keep them to two 
minutes because we have such a very limited  

time window for this very, very important topic. 
I will begin with Tinne Van der Straeten. And ask  

you to talk about what you see as the most 
pertinent advantages of citizens energy. 

Thank you. It's great to be invited. Your question 
is difficult to answer. My answer will be very  

concise. I do think that energy in communities 
needs democratic and progressive energy sector.  

And we are also building our support to 
the energy transition. We are living now in  

challenging times. The energy transition is a vast 
project. Although certain things are known, it's  

still a question of involving regions. The good 
thing is that we have a lot of solutions in place,  

and what we should focus on is not only 
infrastructure but also on people's minds  

and people's hearts. The energy transition is not 
only about technical issues, but infrastructure  

project is also about people. And we have 
good examples like installing solar panels.  

Like also insulation support. Also, we see 
that there is financial participation of  

people that these projects have less 
problems to build. But I think we can do more  

if we understand better emotions of people 
linked to energy transition. So the answer is,  

yes, it will be more democratic and really 
more inclusive, but for us policymakers,  

it will be very important to keep telling our 
story and to win people's hearts and Minds  

you're telling us that, in fact, one of the 
central advantages from a policymakers's point  

of view is that a more inclusive popularly?based 
energy system also builds public acceptance  

for the challenges surrounding energy tradition. 
Very interesting, indeed. Let me go over to Tri  

Mumpuni and ask in your experience what kind 
of challenges arise in the context of a broad  

community energy rollout. And if you 
wish, also tell us ?? because all of our  

poll respondents did support more public 
and regulatory support. What kind of  

public and regulatory support are 
your projects getting in Indonesia? 

Thank you. Well, thank you, Dr. Crane. 
What I would like to share here is that the  

biggest challenge for us is to have a consistent 
framework. Which is very difficult to have that,  

especially in the transition of ?? from the big, 
large, centralized system of the energy community  

and what we're struggling with now, 
we changed the transition to become  

more community based, renewable energy, and easy 
access for all. Meaning that the development of  

renewable energy for the community we've done so 
far for the last 30 years is that we want to have  

an approach ?? and we did that successfully?the 
approach of techno anthropology where we can  

understand the community passion and imagination. 
The way we do it is completely staying together  

and listening to what the community. And we 
also understand that each island in Indonesia,  

we have more than 17,000 islands and each island 
has its own primary energy. We can find a place  

where the micro?hydro is abundant. We also have 
place where only solar can be run and very small  

wind turbine can be applicable in that kind of 
area. But the biggest issue is that there is no  

such regulatory framework that makes sure that 
all the projects done for the community?based  

will be in place properly. Because everything 
has to be done in a different way. Meaning that  

in some areas, it is very easy access to build 
a community?based development on energy for the  

community, but in the other part, there is some 
regulation that makes it difficult. For instance,  

more of the hydro is in a 
very nice place, forest, and  

some of the regulations saying that you 
cannot axe the forest. I said, what?  

We are not destroying the forest. We are really 
educating the local community that if we want  

to secure our electricity for the whole year, we 
have to secure the ?? meaning that we have to keep  

the water running as what we designed, 
and by doing so, we have to make sure that  

the trees in the forest have to be there all the 
time. So this is also environmental conservation  

in the other hand. But this is still not easy 
because some of the government is saying that, no,  

there is no way that you can go to 
the village ?? to the forest. This is  

one of the ossicles. Another obstacle is the local 
government regulations not formed yet. So it's  

always changing all the time. The best instrument 
we need is actually there is a firm regulation  

that, "A", community?based development on 
renewable energy has to be clean energy,  

renewable, and also community based. 
Thank you. That's what I can share. 

Thank you very much. Let me go to Myriame 
Castanie and ask you to pick up on the question  

of regulatory and legislative frameworks. 
Clearly there was a response in our poll  

that we need more support not only in the sense of 
financial support, but the regulatory framework.  

We just heard from Tri Mumpuni about some of 
the challenges associated with that. Balancing  

general principles with local needs and 
particularities. So, perhaps you can say a  

word how you think legislation should be designed 
to unlock the full potential of community energy. 

Yeah, thank you very much. Couldn't agree more 
with what has been said before, and I'm really  

happy to see that also the people listening agree 
that there is a need for legislation. I guess,  

I mean, I'm talking from a European perspective 
here, but we have the EU Renewable Energy Director  

that was agreed last year that really gives 
citizens a place in the energy regulation, and  

we've seen that this has made a huge difference 
already. Where before only a few governments were  

talking about this and working on this. Really all 
EU governments are trying to put in legislation  

for citizens, and we've already seen how this 
starts to benefit citizens all over Europe.  

And in this context, I guess what's important 
for governments to keep in mind when designing  

legislations is, first of all, if you're working 
on, I don't know, definitions legislation for  

energy communities in your country, it's important 
to make sure to include democratic principles, for  

instance. In the EU directive, there are specific 
principles that say this is the way to set up an  

energy community. It ensures that citizens keep 
effective control over the energy community. So,  

for instance, cooperatives, they embody this 
principle by saying each member has one vote  

regardless of how much money they've invested in 
the community. And a second thing to keep in mind  

is to make sure that the laws actually benefit the 
citizens. There are plenty of laws in the energy  

market that benefit the big players. Legislation, 
for instance, the EU Renewable Energy Directive  

has been designed specifically to benefit 
citizens, and it needs to benefit those citizens  

in that case. Last thing, maybe, in the EU at 
least, now that we have laws that are being put  

in place, it's not enough to just stop there. 
It's really important to go beyond and see  

how can we create easier procedures for citizens 
to enter the energy market? How can we set up  

funding mechanisms that are really specifically 
available to citizens? We often talk about the  

principle of a bike lane. So, if you imagine 
take a cyclist, throw him on the highway and say,  

that's fine, you're part of the game now together 
with the cars and trucks, we all know the cyclist  

is at a disadvantage here versus the cars and 
the trucks, but we still need cyclists to have  

a clean transport system. And the same way we need 
citizens to have success in the energy transition,  

but citizens don't have the same kind of resources 
that big players have. And this is why governments  

really need to put in place simplified permitting 
procedures, financing mechanisms that are really  

specifically for citizen projects, if we want 
this to take ?? to take off in Europe and across  

the world. In the EU, we've seen successful 
government initiatives in Scotland and Ireland,  

for instance, that have put in place unique 
support mechanisms. And the last thing, maybe,  

in order to do this successfully, you need to 
have a proper look at your own legislation and  

really analyze what things currently put barriers 
to the citizens, and how can I create opportunity  

as a government? So, yeah, to recap, make good 
definitions, make sure it's really for citizens,  

assess your own legislation to identify 
barriers and opportunities, and create  

simplified procedures and funds 
for citizen energy projects. 

Thank you very much. In our remaining time, 
which, unfortunately, is quite short, but let  

me come back to all of you and ask you to talk a 
little bit about specific cases and best practices  

so that we can perhaps do what the BETD has set at 
its important goal and really give people a sense  

of how we can make this happen on the ground. So, 
first question to you, Minister Van der Straeten,  

if you could talk about how you are working if 
Belgium to facilitate citizen energy. You said  

you're all for it. So what are you doing 
to unlock the potential concretely? 

Thank you. Thank you for your question. Only a few 
weeks ago or several weeks ago, here in Belgium,  

offshore winds. And we are going to double our 
capacity in the upcoming years. We are going to  

double our capacity in the North Sea. So it is 
absolutely my intention to see how we can win  

this also with citizens. I talked about their 
ideas and their suggestions. How we can work  

together and how we can make sure that we can 
involve other citizens also in our offshore winds  

move that we are planning. But I also asked them 
another thing. I am also responsible for energy  

sovereignty. And I all asked them to come up with 
situations and specific cases that we not only  

look at infrastructure but also look 
at energy bills. And citizens and  

corporations can play a central role. What 
I see is something that is magic is that  

citizens can help to ?? for example, to 
produce a lot of solar energy. They buy  

surfaces from their customers. And this is 
something that citizens can help make us realize  

so we can serve a greater good. So the results are 
really, in my policy, that I can provide and make  

the transition work at the infrastructure 
level and also at the people level 

Thank you very much. And let me go back now to Tri 
Mumpuni. As I mentioned, you have been involved in  

numerous, dozens of community projects. So 
could you sum up for us what you see as the  

best practices for citizens' energy support, to 
roll these out and have them be truly effective?  

I believe your microphone is on mute, Tri Mumpuni.  

Yes. Okay. Great.
Thank you. What so far we do is that  

we have on our own project, you know, because 
we asked the government to give us space,  

the community needs space to provide their own 
energy, utilizing their own local resources.  

If there is water, we can make micro?hydro, 
mini hydro, if there is behind, we can  

set up a wind turbine. This is very important 
for us. We are so far successful because  

we can fight to have this right. It means that 
we need somebody who keeps persistent asking,  

please give us space. The community needs space 
to provide the energy with renewable energy.  

And also this is what I call democratization 
of energy. Because what I understand and  

learn is that the government loves to have a 
centralized, big, huge, very hard technology. But  

what we need is the appropriate technology, even 
if it is a hard technology. Even from Germany,  

for instance, a long time ago where we had ?? 
you know, we learned something from a program  

which actually the energy transition from a 
modern country to the traditional Indonesia  

in the first place. And what they do is that 
this technology transfer to us really helped  

the local community to decide. So what I say 
by democratization of energy is basically only  

regulatory support and also financial support. 
That's it. That's two things. Very important.  

And let the community decide what is the best 
renewable energy and clean energy for them.  

I think this is what I can say that is the best 
practice we have been dealing with so far. Because  

we are, you know, fighting to get the right of 
asking space for community to provide our own. But  

my concern is space will be consistently ?? can be 
there because the changes of the political system  

will also change something like this. Okay. This 
is ?? this is what I think we have to have a firm  

strategy going forward and also firm support for 
the community to provide their own energy demand.  

And, of course, helping establishing what 
I call energy democratization. Thank you. 

Thank you very much. So, a good deal of autonomy 
as a key best practice. Let me go over now again  

to Myriam Castanie with essentially the same 
request to you. You talk a little bit about  

concrete projects and initiatives that you've 
been involved in and what for you emerged as best  

practices there in terms of enabling these kind 
of citizen energy schemes to be truly effective. 

Yeah, I think there are a few examples I 
can touch on my experience from the islands,  

billion you mentioned earlier one of the 
communities I can point to, for instance,  

the island of La Palma in Spain. We were 
involved with through the EU commission.  

Where basically the initiative for the energy 
transition really started with the citizens.  

So there was a group of citizens that went around 
to all the municipalities on the islands and said,  

hey, we want to do an energy transition 
here. We think we have huge potential,  

and this will benefit our local economy and they 
convinced all the 14 municipalities on the island  

to sign a manifesto, and they started working ?? 
they at some point also got the support of the  

local island government to start working more on 
a citizen?led energy transition. They've really  

always focused on keeping the citizens at the 
heart, having the citizens drive the transition,  

and what happened over time is they also 
joined the EU island Secretariat which  

triggered a conversation with the government. 
They've actually launched the first energy  

community on the Canary Islands just 
this week or last week. I don't remember.  

So it's a really interesting example of how 
this really ?? it moves from bottom to top  

and back to the bottom. The initiative in these 
cases, in many cases that we see, is that the  

communities are the ones driving the transition 
and this is really why we think it's important  

to give them space in the legislation, because 
there is so much potential that is untapped at  

the moment and we can unlock if we just give 
the citizens the space to own and drive it. 

Thank you very much. We're coming slowly 
toward the end of our time, so I would like  

to ask essentially all three of you to now take 
a step back and tell us how important you think  

people's energy, citizens' energy will be in 
the overall energy transition. Is this kind of  

a small niche or do you see this as 
really being an important driver?  

And I'll start with minister Van der Straten. 

Thank you, Dr. Crane. It is government's role 
to take global and to act local. And it is the  

framework to empower people. And confidence that 
people when they can be in charge of their own  

energy, they will do so, and they'll do this as 
stakeholders and shareholders of their own energy  

system. I also have full confidence in their 
abilities to be more inclusive. And also the  

energy transfer. And I thank you very 
much for your perspective on that also.  

Also this transfer of technology that we 
can distribute in a global way. Thank you. 

Thank you very much. Before we go on, I want to 
get closing thoughts from our other two panelists  

as well, but we did pose a second audience 
question and audience members are voting on  

it right now. So, registered users go to your 
Slido function on your stream, if you would,  

and answer our question. This is a word cloud. 
And it is, what impacts do you expect from  

citizen energy projects? And let's take a very 
quick look at what people are saying. Knowledge  

transfer. Decentralization, of course, 
there in the very center, and, of course,  

that is the essence of this ?? of citizen 
energy, but energy democratization as well.  

And we heard Tinne Van der Straeten she thinks 
that helps drive public support and acceptance  

of the transition. I'm seeing words like quicker 
rollout, climate justice, P2P energy trading.  

So with all that in mind, dear panelists, mini 
grids also clearly a part of this. I want to go  

back now to the other two, and if you would, just 
very brief final thoughts on whether you see this  

as an important driver in the energy transition 
and also whether you would agree with what we  

just saw there on the word cloud. So, first, 
Tri Mumpuni. Your mic is on mute again. Sorry. 

Decentralization is a must, and 
community based is also very important.  

The biggest one, like city, factory, delay can use 
whatever, like, huge pieces of technologies and  

huge funds to support that system, but, 
please, the community have their own access.  

Decentralization. Renewable and more clean 
energy. And this is a part of empowerment. So  

I believe sustainability can be achieved 
if we are using this energy democratization  

to the local community. Thank you.
Thank you very much. And Myriam Castanie, last  

word goes to you.
Thank you.  

You asked if there is potential in citizen energy. 
There is actually a study from a few years back  

that showed in the European Union by 2050, half 
of the citizens in the whole EU could own half  

of the energy installations in the EU. So that 
gives you an idea of the scale of the potential.  

I guess if I want people to go away with something 
from the session, in addition to what Tumminia and  

Minister Van der Straten have said, we need the 
world citizens to get involved if we want to stop  

climate change. If we want to implement the Paris 
Agreement and build a safe world for ourselves.  

If you want people to take responsibility, you 
need to give them ownership, but real ownership.  

And I think everyone here on the panel 
and others are ready to do whatever we  

can to make this happen. And, of course, always 
available if anyone is trying to work on this and  

has questions or needs help. Thank you so much 
for having me today. It's been a real pleasure. 

Just a very quick follow-up, if I may, because we 
saw climate justice also in very large lettering  

in our word cloud. Do you think, Myriam 
Castanie, that there is a connection between  

participation and connection of democratization 
of systems and climate that leaves nobody behind? 

Absolutely. You saw this in what madam 
Mumpuni said. Communities are often  

driving local development. If you let 
local communities decide their own fate,  

their own development, their own economy 
and how they want to build their community,  

that basically ?? that makes it just in itself. I 
mean, obviously we're all still people and there  

are conflicts that can arise or whatever, but 
if people decide over their own lives, then the  

world is a much juster place. Then if things are 
only decided from the top down and very remove  

from the people who are affected by it.
Certainly by the composition of this panel,  

it looks like citizen energy is good for 
gender justice. So, many, many thanks to  

all three of you ladies for being with us here 
to talk about democratization and inclusion  

in citizen energy-based energy systems. 
We're very grateful to have you with us.


