The world is becoming increasingly 
urbanized. As city populations grow,  

the demand for services, but also pressure on 
resources, will increase. How to make cities  

inclusive, resilient and sustainable? 
Let us shape smart and livable cities  

as places where traditional networks and 
services are made more efficient with the  

use of digital and telecommunication technologies 
for the benefit of its inhabitants and business. 

Ladies and gentlemen, many experts believe that 
the planet's fate could be decided by cities  

and towns. By 2050, two thirds of the world's 
population will be living in urban centers,  

putting strain on energy, water, waste, 
mobility and other services and resources.  

The good news is, and many in the audience know 
this from experience because they themselves are  

working in this space, it is at local level that 
much of the most interesting climate innovation is  

taking place. And we heard a little bit about 
that yesterday from John Kerry when he spoke. 

Forward looking cities are absolutely seizing 
opportunities to reduce emissions and to develop  

climate resistant infrastructure. In this 
session, we want to explore the innovative  

approaches that are being taken by livable cities. 
Especially with regard to the use of digital and  

telecommunications smart technologies. And in 
just a moment I want to introduce our eminent  

speakers. But first of all, I want to let 
everybody know we're very eager to get your  

opinion, as always, on our audience poll question. 
And I see some of you are voting already. But we  

would like a lot more people to take part. Go to 
the Slido function on the livestream if you are a  

registered user and you can answer this question.
In your opinion, does smart city technology  

support resilience at both the individual and 
the public scale? So, does smart city technology  

support resilience at the individual and also 
at the public level? So, please vote and we'll  

come back and take a look in just a moment at the 
results. And now I am very pleased to introduce  

our speakers. And as always, I'm going to keep 
the introductions brief, so we have more time  

for discussion. And I'm going to also ask our 
speakers to do the same when we do answer our  

questions that they keep their own responses to 
under 3 minutes in length. Thank you so much.  

I welcome Claude Turmes, Minister for energy 
and Minister for spatial planning in Luxembourg.  

It's great to have Rana Abid, part of a global 
public private multi stakeholder network  

on renewable energy based at the United Nations 
Environment Program. Regine Gunther is Senator  

for the environment, transport and climate 
production in the local government in Berlin.  

Kathy Piazza is chief resilience officer 
for the University of Milan and an adviser  

on urban climate adaptation policy. And 
Marieke Van Doorninck is sustainability  

for the City of Amsterdam. And we are 
still working to get a connection with  

one panelist. So, I'm very sorry that we can't 
see all five on screen yet. But I hope that we  

will be able to do so in just a moment.
So, let us now take a quick look at the  

audience poll results before we do go to 
audience    go to our questions, to our panel.  

So, and we see that there are a great many more 
yeses than noes. But 14% say that at the moment  

smart city technology does not support resilience 
at both the individual and public scale.  

And with that, let me now go to the panel 
and ask each of you to tell us if you would  

about the biggest challenges that you 
face in terms of energy innovation  

and smart city policies and how you 
are approaching those challenges. 

And again, we are very    we are very happy if 
we can have, please, fairly brief answers. So,  

let me begin and just go straight down 
the panel starting with Claude Turmes. 

Oh, I'm sorry, it's Claude who is not with us. 
Excuse me. Sorry. Let us go to you, Rana Abid. 

Thank you so much and thank you 
for the opportunity for being here.  

So, you will not be astonished to hear that I 
will focus on renewable energy. And I think how  

to make cities inclusive, resilient and 
sustainable is clearly with renewables.  

What leads me to say this is not that we are 
launching the cities, that we are bringing about  

the energy network. But clearly the reality that 
cities are a very interactive by climate change.  

They need to become more resilient and have 
an impact on their energy infrastructures and  

as a result    sorry, I have the call from 
Claude. I hope that you don't hear this.  

And so, with renewable energy, what the 
challenges are, we have identified by  

researching and basically what's happening 
in cities is that cities are indeed very  

ambitious when it comes to implementing renewable 
energy targets. So, there is a huge commitment. 

And also, to look into renewable electricity, 
not only in buildings and in transport.  

They also have regulative frameworks. So, palace 
is engaged. But the reality that cities in  

general do face I guess two main challenges 
I would like to align here. One is clearly  

resources. And this can be expertise. But it 
can also be    and this has been increased by  

COVID pressure too. The one is how also that 
national frameworks might not always empower  

cities in the way they need to be empowered 
to really play the key role they have to play  

in driving the transition. What is also important 
to see is that cities themselves    and this is  

something we see    we see many cities engaging. 
1 billion people live in cities with renewable  

energy targets and policies. But many cities 
do not see themselves historically as renewable  

energy players or as key actors in the transition.
And there's clearly something where information,  

facts and dialogues like here will contribute to 
the city space and the energy tradition space. 

Thank you very much. And I see 
that we do now have Minister  

Turmes with us. I hope that you can hear 
and see everybody very well, Minister. Thank  

you for joining. And sorry the technology 
took a little time to get off the ground.  

I wanted to start out by asking all of the panel 
to talk a little bit about what you see as the  

most crucial approaches for making cities 
more inclusive, resilient and sustainable,  

including through smart technologies. 
And also, to just mention a couple of  

the challenges associated with that. So, I will go 
straight to you, Minister, for your own response. 

Do you hear me?
Yes. 

Okay. So, I think what is important to understand 
in this climate crisis is that technology alone  

will not solve entirely the problem. So, of 
course, we have solar energy, we have wind energy,  

we have energy efficient buildings, we have 
electromobility, we have public transport. But  

we must go beyond that. And beyond that is I 
think on two things. One is the social fabric  

around the climate change. All of us know we 
need CO2 taxation. We need a price for CO2. But  

the price for CO2 risks to divide the society 
between the richer parts and the poorer parts.  

The circumstance is really this    we need 
money at national level. And at city level  

to compensate for that. I give you an example. In 
Luxembourg, we have introduced the CO2 taxation  

and 50%, so, 5 0 percent have said we 
take to compensate financially the 30%  

of the population which have the least income.
And on that   so, and that's extremely,  

extremely important. In order to keep all 
parts of society. And the second thing is  

really this strategic alliance between national 
urban planning and also spatial    the Minister of  

spatial planning and urban planning in Luxembourg. 
And the cities. Because we need lifestyle changes  

in addition to technology. And lifestyle changes 
have    I take the bike and I leave the car.  

I    basically I go over to having more 
vegetables and meat and I want to have it  

in a garden which is close to me. Which 
means spaces for urban gardening in the city. 

So, all these things, there's a social 
cohesion and completely reorganizing our cities  

for more green, for more humanity, for more 
spaces, for this kind of lifestyle changes.  

For that, we need also money. And one thing  

which President of Commission of the Alliance 
suggested that is completely counterproductive.  

If the EU is planning to move building and 
transport into the EUATS, that means that they  

take the money at the national level to organize 
the social cohesion and to help cities to do this  

kind of greening. And moves it to Brussels.
And that is completely counterproductive. So,  

my call from here goes also to the 
European Commission. Don't mix EU ATS with  

transport and buildings. Leave transport 
and buildings in national competence.  

The national level is a much, much better place 
to ensure the social cohesion and to help in  

the cities to green the cities and to make 
lifestyle changes in a positive way possible. 

Thank you very much for that. And I want to 
come back also to what you said about planning  

a little bit later on. But let me first go 
now to Regine Gunther with the request for the  

same issue. To talk about what you see 
as the most crucial approaches for making  

Berlin livable and resilient. Certainly, 
Berlin often gets very high ratings on rankings  

of livable cities worldwide. What are you doing 
to make sure it stays that way or even improves? 

Yeah, thank you, Melinda, for the invitation. 
I'm pleased to be with you and hear what the  

other panelists present because we are in a 
worldwide transition process. It is a place where  

people live in mostly very dense environments and 
economic activities take place. So, we are now  

in a situation where the development patterns of 
the last years that    more or less car friendly  

environment. Now it's challenged and that means 
we have to reorganize our cities completely.  

We have a lot of challenges. Let me 
name some of them. It's evolution,  

it's obviously contributing to climate 
change through burning fossil fuels  

in the energy sector, but as well in the 
transport sector. And we have the problem of the  

reorganizing the energy sector. 
Moving away from coal to renewables. 

And the concept of the past that we have to 
reorganize through the mobility around the cars  

led to a more or less very unjust distribution of 
the public space. We have a lot of space that is  

provided for mobility and very less space 
that is provided to people. So, Berlin now  

has started to want to rethink and reorganize 
cities. For the lives of the citizens.  

That means we have a new law here in Berlin that 
takes priority for bikes, public transport and  

pedestrians over private cars. We have reorganized 
the    or we are in the process to reorganize the  

traffic flows in the direction through 
the normal fossil fuel energies and  

to give more    much more money to install 
renewables. And as already mentioned,  

we are thinking completely about public 
space and how to distribute that. 

But we need to make the space for private 
cars much more expensive. We want to give  

disincentives. And we want to give 
more incentives to people to use  

public transport. So, it's a whole new range of 
how to reorganize not only by new technologies.  

It's about reorganize the society. And there is 
the society that we need to think about new places  

where the citizens can be part of this transition. 
And that is where we are at the moment.  

And what I can see or    from the incentives is 
that people are willing to move. We want to have  

other environment. And they want to have 
more space for the children close to the  

   the homes and not only far away in the    
in the environment of Berlin. So, it's a whole  

movement to move away from the old idea of what 
a city looks like in order to have a new city. 

Thank you. And let me go over to Marieke Van 
Doorninck to talk about Amsterdam. Another  

city that scores very high on ratings of livable 
cities. What Amsterdam is doing in the space. And  

I was interested when Minister Turmes was talking 
to hear his reference to different sectors that  

clearly all    to join them up means absolutely 
getting out of silos. He was talking about  

transport, energy, retail, food consumption and 
so on. So, clearly, one of the crucial aspects  

of approaches, but also challenges, is to get 
a really joined up approach. Or am I wrong? 

I think that's    that's exactly right. I've 
heard a few things that I thought that sounded  

so familiar because it's what Amsterdam is 
also doing. Of course, as a city government,  

you do have a responsibility. But in a way, 
if we really want to make this change, if we  

really want to make this big transition, it's 
about everybody within the city that takes it,  

plays a role and has a responsibility. But also 
has ownership of this    of this transition.  

And we said before that actually we tend to see 
the energy transition as a technical transition.  

And not just changing fossil fuels to biofuels. 
Changing your normal car to an electric car.  

But that is not the real change that we need. 
That's not the real transition that we need. 

The energy transition is a social transition. 
And if we can't do it in that way, injustice  

is really    is really around the corner 
because as it was said, it was the gas prices,  

rich people can still afford it. But others can't. 
We have to go through a stricter thing in order to  

make a just and equal energy transition. Where 
actually we also have a completely different way  

of looking at what a city needs in order to 
thrive. We have to look at another way of  

what we mean by economical prosperous. 
Do we need growth? Or do we just neat  

to prosper? Do we need to thrive as a city?
And I do believe, and I think it was said before,  

that cities do have an ecosystem in order 
to make that happen. Because we have quite  

good contacts with our business. We have 
the contact with the citizens in the city.  

So, I believe that as a government, we can provide 
direction, give direction and say where we want to  

go. As Amsterdam, we make sure that our mission 
is very clear. We want to be a climate neutral by  

2050. But we also want to reduce our emissions 
by 55% in 2030. We're looking at both of these  

environments. Getting natural gas out of the 
house and get sustainable heating into housing.  

We're looking at the industry. We are looking 
at mobility I think in the same way as Berlin  

is going. Get out of your car, get on your bike. 
But also provide less space for cars and promote  

public transport. But also looking at how we can 
actually make energy in our own city by solar  

panels and wind energy. Many ways we're looking 
at. Of but also looking at how we can make sure  

we are not just telling others what to do, but 
also saying to others, come up with your ideas. 

Because we believe as a government, we can't 
do this all the alone. And we don't have all  

the knowledge or the expertise. And as long as we 
are telling people what to do, we are responsible,  

and we have to do it. Where actually if we invite 
citizens, businesses, to come up with their ideas  

and to give them space in order to do that, 
and even to give them space to sometimes fail.  

Because we're in the midst of this transition. 
We don't know all the ways. We know our goal  

and we have to find the ways how we want to do 
it. And I do think that for us, one of the most  

important things is, is that we have to become not 
only sustainable and a resilient city, but what's  

said in the question, we have to be an inclusive 
city. And that is why we as a city adopted the  

economy model where actually what it means to 
be a thriving city means that we ensure progress  

within the ecological and social boundaries.
That means that whatever we do, we don't want  

to cause more climate change. We don't want to 
cause more emissions. We have to reduce    we  

have to reduce the pollution that we are making in 
order to stay within these ecological boundaries  

and at the same time make sure that we also keep 
the social foundation of our city very strong. So,  

that means that everybody has adequate housing. 
Everybody has shelter. Everybody has enough money  

to live. And this    I think this is a double 
task that we have to do in order to get to this  

transition. And actually, on top of that, it's not 
only our responsibility to do that for Amsterdam.  

But also, for the rest of the world. And that 
means that we really have to look at the way  

that we consume and produce. Because we know 
that our consumption is actually having a very  

bad effect on other parts of the world.
So, this holistic approach will help  

us in this ideal of an inclusive city.
Thank you so much. And let me go to Piero  

Pelilzzaro now who has been so patiently 
waiting to talk about what you see as  

innovative approaches that you are taking in 
Milan. And by the way, that word "Innovative."  

I want to talk about innovative governments 
a little bit later, pick up on what we heard  

about getting citizens involved. But generally 
speaking, Piero Pelilzzaro, what are you doing  

in Milan to ensure that your city will 
be sustainable and livable going forward? 

First of all, let me start from this point. Two 
years ago, our Mayor was becoming the deputy  

Mayor in charge for the climate change and the 
environment, and the first thing was to reorganize  

the structure of the public administration. 
When he create canned a department,  

it's composed by three others. By others. 
And the climate, water and waste. And these.  

These three others are working on mainstreaming 
of the transition and the climate totality  

approach to all the different departments. So, the 
third thing I think we need as a city is to make  

sustainable and smart approaches that 
being adopted but all the other department. 

Saying what we have done. We are basically working 
on three main things at the moment. One is the  

timing in the city. We always underestimate 
looking at the climate position, the time.  

Time of the mobility, time of the services, time 
of the work. So, we are now working on a new time  

of the city that could be half the congestion 
to make the city more close to our citizens. So,  

to bring to them in the    and this is one.
The other point is care. Care of the public space.  

Improving the green. But also, the livability 
of the city. We have launched a program as well.  

That's to increase the bike rides. But it is 
a main cause to increase the capacity of the  

population and the community needs together to 
dialogue. It's not only a matter of climate.  

It's a matter of creating opportunity and 
a space for conversation. And space for  

let's say collective memory. Because one 
of the things we believe that it's not     

sometimes the solution comes from the past. So, 
for us, we see this as information plus memory.  

Collective memory is one of the key points to 
bring back nature to the city. Because it's about  

planting trees around. Our city is full 
of trees before the Second World War and  

before the First World War. And then the society 
comes and changes. So, planting trees is not an  

innovation. It's bringing back memory to the city.
And last, let me say, to take in my 3 minute slot.  

What we were saying before. It says, it 
takes the national level. I will say, it  

takes transport at the city level. Because I 
think cities are even more capable than the  

national level to understand the need for public 
transport. We are now working on a full electric  

fleet for the public before 2030. But we also 
understand more than the national level how we  

should redesign our buildings in terms of energy 
features. I think city should have a seat at the  

table to get directed. And it is not possible 
yet, now in the country I know it is possible.  

But cities should have a certain site to talk 
about the infrastructure. Because from Europe,  

they are directly close to the people and 
that's how you become part of the union. 

Did I just see a signal from you, Minister Turmes 
that you would like to speak to that point?  

Your microphone seems to be on mute, sir.
Do I have to unmute it myself? 

Yeah, you're with us now. So, please. You have   
Okay. Good. I think we are    we seem to be in  

agreement. We need money for the social fabric, 
and we need money to rebuild the cities.  

And be aware    and that will be a big fight. 
If EU commission takes transport and buildings  

into the ETS, then national governments will not 
be able anymore to help cities. Because national  

governments will have no money anymore to do 
this. So, I think that is really an important  

part. And I hope that cities can join those 
countries in Europe which don't want this move. 

The other thing is what I find really interesting 
is that yesterday the prize for architecture  

went to two French architects. When you see 
what these architects and urbanists have done,  

it's exactly what we need. When they were asked 
20 years ago to reconfigure an urban space,  

they said, these urban spaces is perfect. 
Just add some trees. Give people a bit more  

places to sit down and organize what    
what you just mentioned from Milan which is  

places where people can have conversations.
So, the city is the    it's a place for people who  

meet and build a new vision and build basically 
the collective move into local food, local    so,  

moving with bicycles and space for children. 
And it's really interesting that the Nobel Prize  

for Architecture went yesterday to two architects 
and urbanists that have this as the focus.  

And we need that also rethinking of specialists.
May I just ask you, Minister, because you  

have emphasized resources twice. And clearly 
that is a major challenge that cities  

are facing as they make this transition. Now, 
Luxembourg, as I understand it, became the first  

European country last fall to launch a 
sustainable bond framework. Can you tell us  

how that could play out at city level? What kind 
of resources that could generate? And do you see  

sustainable bonds as one avenue also for cities 
as they are seeking to leverage resources? 

Thank you for that question. Because what we 
need is, we need targets and policy instruments.  

We need the cities and these partnership 
for cities. And the third thing we need is,  

we need guidance for the financial markets. 
And I can say that from being in the government  

which has the opportunity to be one of 
the largest fund places in the world. 

And sustainable criteria for 
banking and investment funds  

is extremely, extremely important. We have to 
get out of black foreign investments and into  

green investments. And again, here I have to make 
it a bit political. We have, last year, decided at  

EU level to have a whole framework for financial 
services which is called the taxonomy. Which is  

how do we define what is a green investment? A 
sustainable investment? And that was a big fight  

which the European parliament and the progressive 
governments won. So, no. The last case I got the  

information is that at the highest level of 
the EU commission, Mr. Timmerman said they  

are considering to bring gas    gas    back into 
the definition of green investments and to bring  

nuclear energy on the same level as renewable 
energy in the definition of EU for what is green. 

And also, from taking this opportunity, if 
that happens, I think financial markets will  

be completely disorientated. Nuclear is clearly 
not part of the solution. And gas can also not be  

part of the solution. So, also, again, it's very 
nice that he opened this very important yesterday,  

but at the same moment the EU Commission is 
organizing counterproductive policy instruments  

at the EU level. Then it will be damn difficult 
for us at national level and at city level to have  

banks and investment funds helping us to invest in 
to green, what is really green. And we need that. 

Okay. Thank you very much. Let me link that up to 
the energy transition in cities. And I'm going to  

do that via a word cloud question that we have 
posed to the audience. And we've gotten some  

interesting answers. We asked: How should 
want smartness of a smart city be measured?  

I'm hoping that our panel can see the answers that 
our audience has been sending into us. A number of  

them, not all of them, but many of them do relate 
to energy issues. Among them, banning combustion  

engines. Somewhere else on here or on the 
second word cloud we had 100% renewables. Green,  

accessibility, energy efficiency and so on. 
So, let me now go back to the panel and ask you  

if we are talking about the challenges 
of the energy transition in cities. 

And getting a coherent vision that is also 
driven by local needs and local citizens'  

desires. How do we join that up with 
   with initiatives at the federal and  

even EU level? Because what we're hearing 
from Minister Turmes is that we don't have  

what policy nerds call policy coherence. We've 
got one set of goals and policies at EU level,  

maybe another one at national level. And now all 
of you talking about what you think your cities  

need in terms of bottom up self determination. 
A big challenge. How do we link it up when  

it comes to energy? And I'll go straight 
down the panel once again, Rana Abid? Had 

Yeah, thank you. That's a very good point and 
connects to the discussion we had before. So, what  

is very apparent is that the city agenda and the 
priorities here are not always under the energy  

umbrella. The reality is that energy    and moving 
fossil fuel to an efficient and renewable energy  

system and economy and society is something which 
needs to happen. So, we need to ban fossil fuel  

and support energy efficiency and renewable 
energy. And I think that needs to happen here  

from the energy side, and I include on this, is to 
position the renewable energy debate. And I think  

that's the first thing to do in a different way. 
When it's about mainstream energy, we need the  

political support, market support and 
citizen support. And this is why cities  

have such a key role. Because all of 
these are part of the city environment. 

And this also means that we need to still 
have the transition, the energy transition.  

Does allow different players to meet this agenda 
of a healthy environment, of the pollution of  

cities, city engagement, citizens engagement. 
And that should be the first thing to do.  

Building on this, it also means that we need to 
get out of our silos with regard to this. It is  

not enough to have the energy ministry speaking 
about the energy rates. It needs to be all  

industries together and all governments together.
And I think that some of the cities and some  

of the national governments that have the 
really successful are the ones that have put  

cross cutting topics like climate in. Whether it's 
a committee, whether it's a very forward looking  

part. On putting basically climate into the 
Security Council. These are things that are  

fundamental. Now, cities can really bring another 
way of thinking here because the systems approach  

is important. Why do we need cities? Also, the 
national governments do need cities to reach,  

basically, the energy transition targets. Eighty% 
of the energy we consume is being consumed for  

heating, cooling and transport. 80 percent. And 
these are the sectors where we have 10% or 3% of  

energy. And the transition is not happening in 
the same way as the sector. The solutions are  

local. The solutions are local jobs, technologies 
and local policies to some extent. And I think  

what is important is to really give cities the 
legislative power. But also, a seat basically  

at the table when it comes down to define 
national policies and also existing finance. 

What I think is really interesting is because we 
are all working towards moving to this transition.  

Citizens can create a lot of pressure on 
policymakers to be more ambitious. And I think  

that is clearly something to use. Which is also 
be used if the city side. Partnership with cities  

is important. And we have the Republic of South 
Korea where the cities worked together to create  

pressure on the national government to be more 
ambitious and engaged in the decarbonization. So,  

I think it's not only about multilevel governance, 
between the governance levels and an integrated  

approach. It's also about the sectors working 
together. And it is also about the cities working  

together to create a stronger impact, I guess. 
And mobilize economically with the citizens. 

Thank you very much. I have an eye on the 
clock. Our time is quite limited. We have  

about 5 or 6 minutes. So, I would be very grateful 
for short ish answers from our remaining three  

panelists. Also, on this same issue of how we get 
coherent joined up action. And also, coherent,  

joined up financing issue support for the 
livability initiatives that all of you have talked  

about and are clearly prioritizing in your cities. 
So, Regine Gunther, how is this playing out in  

Germany? We meet here under the auspices of 
two federal ministries. Would you say we have  

policy coherence in a city like Berlin? And the 
framework and the financing at national level? 

I would say we are on our way. We need better 
top down approach. That was what was mentioned  

that the European legislation is not really linked 
very good to the    our national legislation and  

as well to the community or the municipality 
legislation. And in this really not speeds up  

that we have a coherent approach. I think it will 
be very difficult to speed up the transformation.  

That is why we need the bottom up approach. 
What we have here in the past here in Berlin  

that once citizens organized themselves, they 
are really able to pressure local politicians  

and the local politicians pressure the 
national politicians in order to     

to make the change happen. And so, it's 
a kind of inter linkage between bottom up  

and top down. And so, what was already mentioned.
At the highest level, or in case the European one,  

is not giving up    is not giving the right 
incentives to us. Then it will be very  

difficult for us to bring here in the cities the 
right    or what we wish we had on the ground.  

So, I would support the idea that in the EU 
ETS transport and the building sector should  

not be integrated. It will make the change here in 
cities much more difficult. So, we need to think  

very carefully if we would go with such a move. 
And what implication that would mean. And so,  

and I would strengthen what has been said. We 
need a proper framework on the European level,  

then on the national level. And then 
we are able on the municipality level  

to bring them into the right direction. If that 
is not the says, it makes our life very difficult. 

Thank you very much for that. Let me move 
straight away to Marieke Van Doorninck. 

I do think it's very recognizable what everybody 
is saying. I think what we need is that to use  

the power of innovation that is in the cities. 
Because we have, you know, the citizens    the  

companies that want to move onwards. But quite 
often, national legislation is not quick enough  

or not flexible enough to accommodate these 
innovations. So, before let's say we have to  

do thing completely different. In the cities at 
least the innovation space to make it different.  

For example, we are now in Amsterdam looking at 
smart grids. Grids exchange energy and get off  

the grids and build them by themselves. It means 
great responsibility for citizens, ownership,  

support for the energy transition. But 
also, to show what actually can happen. 

So, I do support the fact that we need to have 
these legislations different. But let's at least  

give cities this room for innovation, this room 
for also making our own mistakes. But to make sure  

that we support and incubate these new energies 
before we make it international legislation.  

Because then we are quite often too late. And 
there is this    let's say energy that we can  

actually, you know, both in    in the people's 
energy as well as green energy that we can use so  

much in order to make the changes that we need.
One thing that I saw in the word cloud was the  

words "Comfort." And I do think that actually 
in order to go to citizens and talk about energy  

transitions, it's not always about green. It's 
also just to give more comfort and a more livable  

housing. Then the energy had transition comes by 
itself. As long as cities have this possibility  

to make their own decisions on 
legislation around smart grids, et cetera. 

Thank you very much. And also, that mention 
of smart grids, very interesting. Because  

before the lunch break today I moderated a panel 
on citizens energy projects. And we often think of  

these as being projects for rural areas that may 
be aren't even connected to the grid. But in fact,  

experimentation is going on in urban centers 
as well and it's very interesting indeed.  

Let me finally go back to Piero Pelilzzaro to 
talk a little bit about how you see this Nexus  

between the different policy levels and also, of 
course, between the different levels of investment  

and resource support in your own case. And you're 
welcome to mention concrete examples like that one  

because I think that also helps us all 
understand the best practices part of this. 

Thank you. So, an example. We are developing a 
letter on the public transport. Especially going  

to electric public transport. To build new lines 
and new infrastructures. This is thanks to the ten  

keys, the financing from the European Commission. 
When the national government is not taking  

a top down approach, but it's the neighborhood 
facilitation and the European Commission  

that supports the role of the 
national government, they can be much  

   it's much easier for us to two from the 
peer level to the level of the infrastructures.  

As I said before, I think of the city, at least, 
should be part of the process. The innovation  

process and the structure. And on the policy.
Because what we need is pretty clear for us. What  

the European Union has assigned in terms of carbon 
neutrality. But if we have the European vision,  

the national vision, and in Italy we also 
have the regional vision because it's a really  

different level to get us the infrastructure and 
the funding and the policy. Then we become a bit  

complicated for us as a city. Because 
in the main terms of one is thinking.  

If climate change is happening and we should 
do it, climate change is impacting on the city.  

So, we need to make the chain between the 
European Union and the cities. Because then  

it's when we shorten the time of reaction 
or time of action to fight climate change. 

And then let me end with a quote. The quote 
is from one of the fathers of the European  

Union. It was speaking about the union 
of people and regions. I think we have  

to move in that direction. Maybe we can 
become cities and metropolitan areas.  

That's what we can get more close to people.
Thank you so much. Great closing words there,  

Minister. I'm very sorry, but we are out of 
time. So, I unfortunately can't take any more  

interventions at the moment. I can say thank 
you so much to all of you for this very, very  

interesting and engaging discussion on the role 
of livable cities in the global energy transition.


