And welcome back, everybody, to the Weltsaal. The 
regulars amongst you, ladies and gentlemen, will  

probably remember the Green Sofa that has become 
an icon of the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.  

It stands not only for the intensive exchange here 
at the BETD, but also for our focus on networking  

with other summits and events worldwide to 
foster global dialogue on the energy transition. 

So, between our conferences, the Green 
Sofa used to travel around the globe.  

It has toured six continents, welcomed 
thousands of people and prestigious guests.  

Alas, those travels were suspended last year 
due to the pandemic. Until we can resume them,  

we have a virtual version of the Green Sofa. 
And in this session, it provides a platform  

for dialogue that has become a tradition here 
at the BETD. Bringing together the International  

Energy Agency and the International Renewable 
Energy Agency. Both of them, of course, uniquely  

steering the global energy systems. I'm 
going welcome our speakers in just a moment. 

But before we do that, we have an audience 
question for you. And it concerns the priorities  

that you believe the IEA and IRENA should have. 
We're asking you what work areas should the IEA  

and IRENA prioritize? And please, if you are 
a registered user, use our Slido window to  

tell us what you think the main priorities 
should be. And as you see, this is a word  

cloud. We're starting to get some words and come 
back to that in a moment after I introduce our  

speakers and take a look at our word cloud.
So, I would like to begin by introducing  

Dr. Fatih Birol. He is Executive Director of 
the International Energy Agency. And joins us  

remotely. And I'm also very pleased to welcome 
Francesco La Camera, Director General of the  

International Renewable Energy Agency, IRENA.
And now, before we get a first input and  

presentation, let me just quickly go back to the 
Mentimeter word cloud. Well, developed quickly  

I must say. We have, of course, renewables at its 
center which is appropriate given our topic here.  

We have just transition high up there in 
terms of priorities. Long term planning.  

Hydrogen also emphasized here in our word 
cloud. And energy transition, of course,  

as well. And then a lot of other phrases being 
entered here. Legislative framework, access to  

energy services. Community, energy, citizen 
energy. Cooperation, infrastructure and more. 

So, very good. Thank you very much. And we will 
now begin with a presentation by Francesco La  

Camera who brings us the latest numbers on a net 
zero scenario. Showing that the 1.5 degree goal is  

still technically and economically feasible. 
Here is Mr. La Camera. The floor is yours. 

Thank you, Melinda. At these levels, it is 
very great to be with you at the Berlin Energy  

Transition Dialogue. I realize it's a privilege 
to be part of the establishment of it and to be  

in the session again with my good friend, Fatih 
Birol. This is an important course, and we are  

looking forward to the discussion over the next 
few days. The BETD team captured the sense of  

this moment in time. Science is clear. According 
to the special report, we need to get to zero  

in 2050. Gas emission must be reduced compared to 
2010. We are entering the decade to define whether  

we have a fighting chance to keep temperature 
rise to 1 degrees. This is becoming clear to many. 

Despite the crisis the and the economic 
difficulties, companies continue to make  

ambitious commitment to action and strategy.
And we are looking at the outlook review. We  

launch it today. And the system must change to 
stop the 1.5  degree trajectory. This is not easy,  

but fundamentally, the energy transition can be 
a great vehicle not only for decarbonization,  

but also for a new economy that is inclusive, 
prosperous and resilient. As you can see from  

the slide, the window of opportunity is narrow. At 
IRENA, 1.5 Celsius pathway to work to be deployed  

at call by 2030 and making the shift towards a net 
zero energy system by 2050. We see six key avenues  

for emission reduction in the 
electrification and others by 2050.  

Electricity becomes the main energy 
carrier. Please, next slide. The most  

important shift is the increasing use 
of low cost energy carriers. The use and  

electricity generation must expand threefold.
Providing 90% of the supply that we sent  

today. It can be all renewable if we 
support it with ambitious energy efficiency  

packages. And we need to consider the distribution 
in industry and transport. IRENA looks at custom  

batteries to be hydrogen by 2030 or before. This 
is a hard task, but it's the new energy reality.  

Markets are starting to shift to renewable energy 
assets. Please, next slide. For example, the share  

of the fossil fuels in the S&P index dropped 
significantly from 13% a year ago to below 2%  

today. In 2020, standard and Poor energy index had 
them you have by 38%. Compared to the energy index  

which was down by 37%. This trend will continue.
But the one point on the agenda requires  

a different speed and scale. So, we go to the 
next slide. I'm talking about investment. The  

plan is placed in 98 trillion to ramp up 
investment by 2050. Our outlook shows that  

an additional 33 US dollar trillion is required to 
align with the 1.5 degrees. Including a short term  

stimulus and recovery funds can leverage that 
investment by a factor of 3 or 4. We must get used  

it to guide investment decision towards energy 
transition priorities. And it's also clear in what  

must not be done. As the Secretary General 
expressed a few days ago, we cannot continue  

to invest in polluting technologies such as coal, 
especially in the private sector, if you want  

a fighting chance. All of those lines should 
be abandoned for a more sustainable solution.  

This means that 24 US trillion dollars of 
investment must be redirected away from  

fossil fuel to energy technologies. The system is 
not a full replacement. It is a new energy system  

based on decentralized technology that 
take advantage of the digital solution,  

and participation of many factors.
This leads me to the final but critical  

point. The energy transition cannot be limited to 
energy choices. Go to the next slide. Thank you.  

To support the integration of renewable energy 
must be hands on to ensure that industrial and  

other economic capabilities are relying 
on the development and climate objective.  

Other market measures can help create a 
real trend and be sure people find jobs. 

Our last view of this showed there were 11 million 
people working in the energy sector today in  

renewables. And we need to create 3 new jobs than 
fossil fuels for each new dollar of spending.  

And there needs to be an effort to retrain and 
develop a new career. Combined with policies,  

making sure that people in communities can try 
and be more inclusive and more resilient. In a  

few weeks, we will release the information we have 
presented today along with policy recommendations  

and analysis of financing services.
Excellencies, ladies and  

gentlemen, we need to ensure that we need to be 
committed and ambitious to make a rapid shift  

for the 1.5 degree course. As I mentioned at the 
outset, the task is daunting. But we must try.  

2021 will be an important year. In 2021, we 
will take more important action. And we have the  

technology in September and the COP26 in November. 
And we will continue the energy transition track.  

And working with energy and cooperating with the 
COP26 for the full success of the conference.  

And this collective action is what we need. 
Many of you are part of the IRENA first  

assembly which took place 10 years ago.
In 2010, the Agency had just 65 members.  

This number grew to 164 members and 20 
country associations. And this force  

moved renewables from niche to the 
center of the energy discourse.  

We have come a long way. And it is the 
time to take the progress to the next  

level. Our shared future depends on it. 
Thank you very much. Back to you, Melinda. 

Thank you very much, Director General. Also, for 
the emphasis towards the ends of your remarks on  

jobs inclusion. We can see in the word cloud, 
climate justice on the minds of many of those  

listening to us today. And I have a question for 
you, but first to Dr. Birol to hear from the I EA  

has been focusing on. And in fact, you have 
done quite a lot of work over this past year  

on the topic of building back better after the 
pandemic. Let's hear what you have learned in  

terms of emissions and how we can accelerate 
clean energy transitions to reach net zero. 

So, many thanks to the invitation to the 
International Energy Agency to share our  

views about the energy transitions and climate 
change. Yes, we made a lot of work on the build  

back better. But we also said, build back better 
all together. It is all together this is important  

in terms of having everybody on board. So, I would 
like to use a few reminders first. Where we are  

today in terms of emissions. Because one of the 
things you said, you underlined, madam moderator.  

We said if the governments will not put the 
clean energies in the economic recovery packages,  

emissions will be there in the beginning of 
2021 where they were before the COVID crisis.  

This was our radar    nightmare scenario. Because 
emissions is a result of the economic downturn.  

Declined in the year 2020 about 6%. But we said  

be careful! Be careful. Emissions will rebound 
if the governments do not change their policies.  

They thought that the COVID crisis, 
the human beings had better hearts,  

better understanding of the energy and issues 
and they will not again use those emitting  

cars, and others. We said, no. There is a need 
for government policies that need to change  

human behavior. But this will not be decisive.
And unfortunately    unfortunately    we were  

right. We were right once again because what we 
have seen is of December 2020, global emissions  

are higher than the year before. Emissions, 
they declined over the last year, but with  

the economies that are recovering, they are back 
again higher than before the crisis. Why this is  

happening is very simple. Because many major 
economies around the world, the economies are  

recovering. And the recovery of the economies we 
are seeing their emissions are recovering as well. 

So, in 2021, this year, we expect a strong rebound 
of the global emissions unless rapid policies are  

introduced by governments. So, therefore, this 
is a reminder in my view. In the absence of  

decisive government policies, emissions will 
not go down. This high lights the importance  

of government policies. And in my view, 
the world might miss a historic opportunity  

to make the 2019 emissions as a peak because 
we may see the emissions again this year and  

the years after unless major policies are not put 
in place. So, the IEA is doing everything we can  

in our headquarters in Paris and with all of our 
colleagues around the world to make sure that this  

year we are moving strongly in terms of clean 
energy transitions. And I wanted to highlight  

four that we are doing. First of all, at the end 
of this month, the UK and the IEA are hosting a  

Net Zero Summit. The 31st of March. We will be 
chairing this, and we have all the key countries.  

Especially four major economies or emitters.
Mr. Kerry from the United States.  

The Chinese top climate change envoy. Executive 
Vice President of the EU. And Mr. Singh,  

the Indian Minister. But in addition to that, we 
have more than 40 Ministers in civil society. And  

we will not see our faces individual, but we will 
see what kind of information we can put in place  

to have the clean energy technology cooperation.
The second contribution we have is on the  

critical minerals. Hopefully very rapid 
deployment of clean energy technologies  

imply a significant increase in the demand 
of some of the critical minerals such as  

nickel, cobalt, manganese and copper. And many, 
many others. And with this, it raises questions  

as some of those critical minerals are 
focused in a few countries in terms of supply.  

Whether or not or not it will have any new energy 
security concerns. Or are they in the concerns  

regarding how they are produced in terms 
of environmental and social footprint?  

And we are going to look.
What does it mean? The increasing  

number of electronic cars, solar panels and 
other creative technologies on the supply side  

in terms of critical minerals. Whether or not 
this will put any pressure on the markets,  

on the energy world in terms of the prices, 
in terms of availability, in terms of energy  

security and others. The third area which I 
believe is a very critical area, cleaner energy  

transitions. The investments to foster them 
coming from European, North America, is good. 

But this is far, far big from enough. Because when 
we look at the IEA's energy outlook, a book that's  

been around since almost 30 years, we all 
know that the more than 90% of the emissions  

are coming from emerging countries. The 
growth is coming from emerging countries.  

So, but if you look at the finance in clean 
energy, in those countries, there's a big gap  

between what is happening in Europe, for 
example, and what is happening in emerging  

countries. How do we    how do we accelerate the 
finance in clean energy in emerging countries?  

It's a major work we are working together 
with the World Bank and the World Economic  

Forum. We are going release in June.
In my view    in my view    if you cannot  

solve this problem, it is one of the fault lines 
of our fight against climate change. Finally,  

we are working on our roadmap    world's 
roadmap on Neat Zero by 2050. And I would  

like to give you some information 
on that and I'll finish my words. 

So, we have started this last September 2020, 
with this work. We have a huge modelling teams  

in the IEA for different issues, for outlook 
and technology perspective for renewables, all  

of them. I brought them together in September. We 
started to model a Net Zero by 2050 energy world. 

And January 11th, we have announced this with a 
huge press conference to the world our plans for  

the IEA this year including our world's roadmap to 
Net Zero by 2050. I have been working with several  

institutions, modelling institutions around 
the world with IPCC, with UK, US, Japan, China,  

European Commission. Several of them how to model 
best that and to learn from their experiences if  

the critics get their reviews in order to make a 
rigorous, solid modelling framework. And recently  

this month we organized a webinar about 200 
models around the world. We were really happy.  

Colleagues from IPCC, China, India, everywhere. 
I was very happy to have colleagues from Nigeria  

in that meeting and got wonderful news and 
their suggestion its which we are working on. 

Now, we also are going to, as I said, make the 
Summit on 31st of March with the UK COP presidency  

and we will get news from the world energy 
and climate leaders about the Net Zero 2050.  

We are going to our report the 
first draft we go to peer review  

around the world to get their feedback. What thing 
is right, what thing is wrong. How we can improve  

our work. And we are hoping    not hoping    we 
will on 18th of May, we will release our report to  

international press in Paris. And I should also 
tell you that this report is officially by the  

co presidency in order to provide the basis for 
the work leaders in COP in Glasgow in November.  

And as I said, this report will build a bridge 
   it will build a bridge between Paris and  

Glasgow. And we are very happy to support the 
co presidency, the UK presidency in that respect. 

Finally, madam, what are we trying to do in 
this report? Just three things. First of all,  

we want to assess the scale of the 
challenge here. We are going to look  

every single sub sector existing in 
the world, sub sector by sub sector.  

What is required to bring the emissions 
to net zero? And we are going to assess  

the existing targets announced vis a vis the 
current sub sectors they are in. Then we are going  

map out the pathway.
Our modelling  

context when we build with the ETP and 
other coming together for this very  

important assignment, we have more than 
800 different technologies we are assessing  

one by one. And we are looking what kind of 
key milestones the world needs in order to  

reach those targets. For example, 
when do we in the world need to  

stop the internal combustion engine cars? Last 
one. Or until then, to build a steel plant  

run by fossil fuels. So, key milestones for the 
governments in order to give them a more concrete  

picture of the task they have in front 
of them. And these will be actionable.  

Not in the air, but actionable policy advice 
for the governments on a sector by sector basis. 

And we will also discuss the implications. 
For example, oil sector. Today we consume 100  

million barrels of oil. It will go down sharply. 
But what are the implications for the industry?  

What are the implications for the manufacturers 
and those workers? We are going to discuss those  

things. But also, the emerging opportunities 
coming from this plan will be a part of it. 

We also are going to discuss the 
wider implications. We are working  

with the International Monetary Fund and 
other institutions. And we have built  

a global commission on the people -centered 
economic    people -centered creative transitions  

under the chairmanship of the prime minister of 
Denmark. I think some 25 leaders around the world.  

We will look at the implications on the societies. 
Because we think the energy transitions should be  

as a result of the support coming from the people. 
Not despite the people. People shouldn't think  

that the clean energy transitions will take their 
jobs from them. And energy process goes higher,  

or energy security will be in question. We 
have to assure them that we put the people  

at the center of the clean energy transitions.
So, as such, we are ready for this year's  

plans and this year's    and beyond. And it 
is great to make a contribution to the BETD  

meeting once again to get with my dear 
colleague, Francesco La Camera. Thank you. 

Thank you very much, Dr. Birol. Also, 
for your emphasis on the need to leverage  

financing for the green transitioning in 
developing green emerging economies, also heard  

from Patricia Espinosa. And a subject we will be 
picking up on later in the dialogue. Gentlemen,  

we have exactly one minute left on the clock. I 
have one super short follow up with the request  

literally for a two sentence answer. First of 
all, to Director General La Camera, if I may. You  

have emphasized time is running out. We have heard 
from lots of speakers. You have a wide membership.  

How do you want to translate your findings 
into practice on the ground? Two sentences? 

First sentence is trying to collaborate closely 
with our member states and put them in contact  

with the public company and the framework. 
Open it for all the teams to have energy.  

And also work on what we launched last year. 
And in collaboration with the funds. We have  

more than 300 partners and more institutions and 
companies that developed with The World Bank, we  

have many projects. We can make the 
finance arrive as needed. Thanks. 

Thank you very much, Director General. And over 
to Dr. Fatih Birol. Same request. Looking toward  

the COP26, looking at political momentum 
in 2021, are you optimistic or pessimistic? 

I am definitely optimistic. 
There are three reasons for that.  

Many countries are putting strong pledges 
to have carbon neutrality in 2050 or later,  

and the political momentum is very strong and with 
the United States coming soon joining this group  

will make the political momentum even 
stronger. The second reason I am optimistic  

because the several clean energy 
technologies are getting cheaper, and  

also affordable in many, many parts of the world. 
We are seeing this is a great, great opportunity. 

People will go for these options, solar or wind or 
efficiency solutions. Not only to save the world,  

but simply because they are cheaper. The second 
reason. And third reason, I see the youth  

is behind this very strong momentum. And 
I look at the last 50 years, the political  

history of the world, if the world's youth 
comes together, and they are coming together,  

they can be a strong engine of the change, 
and because of these three reasons,  

I believe I am an optimistic man and the COP26 
will result in good and unmistakable direction  

for the investors around the world. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Dr. Birol. Indeed,  

we heard some very powerful youth voices earlier 
today. I'm very grateful for you being with us  

for our traditional Green Sofa Dialogue this time 
around in virtual form. All the best, gentlemen.


