COVID-19 has made it clear to all of us 
how quickly and how comprehensively a  

global crisis can affect all of our lives. 
Right down to the most private sphere.  

How can we learn from 
mistakes? And good practices.  

While fighting the global pandemic 
while battling climate change worldwide? 

That is the topic of our next session, and it 
is my pleasure to hand it over to our expert  

moderator. She is the chair of Environmental 
and Climate policy at the University of Munich,  

professor Miranda Scheurs. Welcome to you.
Miranda Scheurs, can you hear us? Yes, I can.  

It's very nice to be here. Welcome to this 
session, flattening the climate curve?lessons  

from the pandemic. My name is Miranda Schreurs 
I'm the professor of climate technology  

at the University of Munich. Today we have 
a very exciting panel. I'm happy to welcome  

to this panel a number of speakers from around 
the world. We have a very international panel.  

Our first speaker will be Hilda Flavia Nakabuye. 
Our second speaker will be Sophie Howe,  

commissioner for Wales, one of the first in the 
world looking at future generations. Then I'm  

happy to welcome Ms. Nino Tandilashvili. Our 
fourth speaker is the mincity of energy, Mr.  

Udaya Gammanpila from Sri Lanka. We're very happy 
to have you here. And our final speaker will be  

ambassador Yeon?chul Yoo. This is a very exciting 
development to have an ambassador for climate  

change in South Korea. We're happy to welcome you 
to this panel. As you know, we are in a period of  

global difficulties because of the climate 
change crisis. And the climate change crisis  

has impacted all of our lives in ways that I think 
few of us could have imagined years ago. And yet  

we are learning to cope with this. We are 
knowing that we have to make big changes,  

and we're now wondering, what can we learn 
from this experience with climate change,  

learn from this experience for climate 
change, what can we learn and lessons  

from how we have dealt with the 
pandemic. For what we might need  

to do to address climate crisis which we 
know is a very big and important crisis.  

So, in order to address this question, I would 
like to first turn the floor over to Ms. Nakabuye.  

You will have three minutes to make your opening 
statement on this question. Please, Ms. Nakabuye.  

Ms. Nakabuye, can you hear me?  

I think we're having a few technical difficulties 
here, so maybe I'll first speak with Sophie Howe  

and ask you to begin us here.
Thank you very much for introducing me,  

and thank you for inviting me to join 
you today. I think that the pandemic  

has been described to me as potentially a dress 
rehearsal for climate change, and I think what  

it's exposed is the fact that, you know, this 
really has taken every nation by surprise.  

I was hearing something else. It's taken every 
nation by surprise, but, really, it should not  

have taken us by surprise because, of course, the 
risk of a global pandemic has been in the top ten  

global risks for very many years. Actually what 
is in the top three of the Global Risk Registers  

at the moment is all relating to climate change 
and the effects of climate change and ecological  

resilience and so on. And so I think it has really 
ex?supposed governments across the world in terms  

of their ability to take on board those risks 
and be actively responding to them. I also think,  

however, that it's, you know, that the pandemic 
has been absolutely horrendous for so many people,  

the impacts it's had on the economy, the impacts 
that it's had on people losing loved ones and so  

on, but I also think it's retained a kind of 
?? or there has been a moment for us to pause  

as individuals to reflect on what actually matters 
in life. A moment in time for people to connect  

back with nature when they've been having to 
stay very close to their homes. A moment for  

governments ?? governments at all levels to be 
thinking about new and different solutions. And,  

of course, it's then surprising, therefore, that 
many governments are saying across the world in  

terms of how we build back post?COVID, and this 
term that is used in the UK, build back better,  

I don't subscribe to that because that suggests 
to me we just do what we did before a little  

bit better. I think we need to fundamentally 
reconstruct, and we need to reconstruct in a way  

which is both dealing with the fallout of COVID 
in a way which is preventing that bigger crises  

coming down the road in terms of climate change. 
So, there are opportunities, I think, to rethink  

communities, opportunities to think about 
20?minute sustainable neighborhoods, opportunities  

to invest to start the economy in sustainable 
industries, opportunities to use the investment to  

create jobs for those who are most marginalized. 
So thinking about those green jobs, linking those  

to people who are furthest from the labor market, 
women, Black and other minorities and so on. So I  

think in a pandemic there is that saying "never 
waste a good crisis." I really want to see that  

crisis ensuring that we pause and reflect on our 
international system?wide approach to responding  

to emergencies before they become emergencies. In 
many ways. But also to reflect on how we use that  

opportunity to innovate, to come together, and 
to do fundamentally different and better things. 

Thank you very much. I'll come back later 
and ask what it means to be a Commissioner  

for future generations. Let me see if we can get 
Ms. Nakabuye. Would you like to make a comment? 

Yes, thank you very much. Miranda, my mic 
was muted so I couldn't hear everything.  

Now I can hear everything perfectly.
Excellent. Maybe you can tell us what  

you think needs to be learned from the pandemic 
for the future for dealing with climate change. 

Okay. Thank you so much. I'm so glad that all 
of you are around the globe are attending this  

conference, and I think I'm going to use this 
chance to speak for those who haven't been part  

of this. And in my context, the word climate 
change is self?explanatory at this level because  

I have grown up seeing how breaking down climate 
is affecting us. For Uganda, the past months with  

the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic have not been 
easy. Neither are we in a good state right now.  

We have been battered with pandemics and killer 
diseases before with much more killing speed  

than we are seeing with COVID-19, but it's just 
like any others before, we can't handle this one.  

It is yet another problem that is 
making things worse. My country,  

Uganda, has been facing constant floods since 
the end of last year, and we have lost about  

1,000 people to floods and landslides. The same 
applies to our neighbor, Kenya. We are facing  

regular extreme weather events that are displacing 
people, but it is nowhere in international media.  

The climate ?? the COVID emergency has 
challenged us. It has shown us that if we  

need to take action, we can, but the big question 
is, why haven't we taken action even for climate?  

We need real action. We are tired 
of the usual talks that we give.  

The massive disruption in our 
lifestyles caused by the pandemic  

have come with an opportunity for us to 
move to a more sustainable lifestyle,  

but we will not be ?? we will be more efficient 
if only our leaders are willing to take concrete  

steps. We need leaders to come up and take 
concrete, decisive steps to encourage the  

positive environmental changes that were enacted 
during lockdown. We already have most of the  

answers to why we are not acting or why everything 
is getting worse with the climate ?? with the  

climate emergency. We need urgent climate action. 
It must be taken to avoid future calamities.  

There has been global unprecedented 
action with sharing support for resources.  

This is really needed and science must be taken 
seriously in these days because pandemics like  

COVID?19 and extreme weather events have come with 
a warning that is often ignored. It is the time  

for us to take concrete steps, not to just outlive 
the COVID pandemic, but come up with steps for  

fighting. This is the beginning of pandemic. If 
we leave this to take its own course, then we will  

suffer more worse pandemics to come. Thank you.
Thank you very much. You're so right. We have so  

many issues we need to deal with. And the 
north-south division is something that is  

still plaguing the planet, and we 
really need to do much more about this.  

I am now happy to turn the floor over 
to Mr. Udaya Gammanpila, who, again,  

is Minister of Energy from the government 
of Sri Lanka. Minister, the floor is yours. 

Distinguished panelists, ladies and 
gentlemen, Sri Lanka's approach toward  

global transition leads to us make several changes 
in the short term while at the same time viable,  

sustainable strategies for the future. Although 
Sri Lanka has not been affected by the pandemic  

as severely as some countries, it has hit parts 
of the economy that drive substantial parts of  

the GDP. What we stand in these pressures, Sri 
Lanka has planned with 100% hydro power grid.  

In the 1990s power started outpacing our ability 
to scale up hydro and has increased over the  

years since then. While we have large renewable 
energy potential as a tropical island nation, our  

country has struggled to bring this forward. There 
are challenges and feasibilities financing and  

projects execution issues. In addition certain 
improvements to the grid and grid management  

system need to be implemented to efficiently 
integrate a higher component of renewable energy.  

Because of that, we are encouraging 
distributed mobility which will  

continue to grow through supported government 
policies, including the introduction of loans to  

support homeowners introducing the last 
budget. We are also adding large solar grids,  

7,000 small-scale solar projects at the local 
level and will soon introduce steps that applies  

ratings and standards and funds for organizations.
Thank you. Thank you very much for these  

opening words. I hope I'm not cutting 
you off in the middle of a statement. 

That's fine. Thanks.
Okay. We'll come back to you, so all is good.  

Your points are very important. You're mentioning 
renewable energy that an option for the future,  

and Sri Lanka as a tropical state, perhaps 
a region where it's possible to do more with  

renewable energy. At the same time, you mentioned 
struggles and the big needs for dealing with a  

situation where, for example, tourism has dropped 
off because of the Corona crisis. So, thank you  

for those opening words, and now I'd like to turn 
the floor over to ambassador Yeon-chul Yoo to tell  

us about climate change in the post?recovery 
period from the South Korean perspective. 

Thank you for having me. I wanted to 
be part of the dialogue this year.  

Before talking about those topics, I'd like to 
say first to all of you, stay safe and healthy  

in the context of the COVID?19 pandemic. With 
regard to the topic, I would like to say that  

the world is facing the unprecedented crisis 
of the COVID?19 pandemic, economic recession  

and climate change. And in this context, I view 
that Green New Deal matters in overcoming this  

crisis. I'm in the first new approach since 
the COVID?19 pandemic because COVID?19 pandemic  

provides us with the opportunity to give 
up a lot of old habits and build up our new  

habits for the sustainable post?Corona era. And 
secondly, the green approach matters because the  

COVID?19 pandemic has clearly indicated the strong 
connection between human health and the health of  

the planet. If we want to be healthy, then our 
planet should be healthy as well. And thirdly,  

green and renewable approaches matter 
because I do believe that short?term economic  

recovery measures should be aligned with a 
long?term strategy of addressing climate change.  

And in the process of implementing the Green New 
Deal policy, it is very important to strengthen  

the global cooperation and no one single actor 
can deliver in tackling COVID?19 as well as the  

climate change. And in the context of the COVID?19 
crisis and climate change, two things should be  

considered. One is promoting private sector 
engagement and the other is policymaking for  

expanding the engagement of developing countries. 
Taking the support to introduce the Green New Deal  

and, of course, a vision for the carbon neutrality 
by 2050. Announced in July 20 designed to push the  

green jobs and investments. And the core media 
consists of going digital and a stronger safety  

net. Our green and divisional leaders will 
deliver the sustainable growth to enable  

the economic community reach to new heights. And 
the Green New Deal will increase employment and  

strengthen the social safety net for the recovery. 
The deal also includes measures to help revitalize  

the local economies for people throughout the 
country. And furthermore, in October last year,  

the vision to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 
to join in the global responses to climate change  

and help achieve inclusive and sustainable growth 
for all of humanity. We will push heard with  

carbon neutrality in all sectors of our economy 
and society while first doing a low carbon system.  

The key of this vision is to achieve a high 
level of energy transition from fossil fuel to  

safe and clean energy. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you very much, Ambassador.  

Your words are very encouraging. The Korean 
Green New Deal for climate and environment  

is a sign of hope that there real are some forces 
and willingness to bring about change, so thank  

you very much for that. And I'm very happy to 
see that our sixth speaker, Ms. Tandilashvili  

has gotten back. I'd like to give you a word, the 
Minister of Environmental Protection for Georgia. 

Thank you for inviting me as a speaker. It's a 
really big opportunity for me personality and for  

the Ministry of Environment and Agriculture of 
Georgia, of course. Let me briefly tell you the  

views from our side and on the main question. So 
we all know and we do understand that the global  

health crisis has created great uncertainties 
across the world and governments have implemented  

tremendous measures to curb the spread of 
the virus and started to implement them. And,  

of course, the governments have to restrict 
the movement and mass gatherings of the people  

across the globe. Also, COVID-19 have seemingly 
put the environmental diplomacy and environmental  

topics a bit on hold. With the postponement 
of COP26 to 2021. Climate change together  

threatens the stability of the whole world 
society and can cause the unprecedented social,  

economic and environmental crisis. Georgia 
heads to low carbon trajectory through increased  

reliance on renewable energy sources. The 
demand for it in the country. Of course my  

country has already provided some ?? I could call 
is small incentives. Just to give you an example,  

households and small-scale businesses can transfer 
the electricity produced by the heating system  

back to the grid. And we believe that 
COVID-19 could be seen as momentum for  

the green recovery by increasing clean 
energy packages for economic sectors  

and believe these challenges can be overcome by 
collaboration with our international partners  

and by sharing our experiences during the 
pandemic period. Of course we are not in a  

position to determine the long?term impact, but to 
do what is best for our sustainable, healthy and  

resilient future, and hence the low carbon 
development with activities in the economy has  

no alternative if we are serious for our future.
The Coronavirus pandemic has already affected the  

usual mobility partners. Partners demanding 
decisions for our citizens needing safe  

alternatives to travel. One of the alternative 
solutions, of course, is to develop bicycle lanes.  

And during the pandemic period, for instance, one 
of the largest cities of Georgia has developed  

and adopted a cycling strategy for 2030 through 
technical support of the German government. And  

so this mobility has received our large attention 
due to the pandemic restrictions, especially when  

the mass transit closes down, especially in 
the urban areas. So with the collaboration of  

some national authorities, the facilitation 
of cycling and walking for our inhabitants  

allowed us to strengthen mobility in our lives. 
Also the emissions from the transportation sector,  

not only air solutions, but a safer and healthier 
future for low-carbon climate friendly practices.  

The pandemic and climate change, we all understand 
that they are closely correlated. Of course,  

lockdowns caused ?? actually slowed climate change 
that resulted in fossil fuel, air pollution and  

energy emissions, but it is also clear that 
this is, of course, the impact on economies,  

so it is important to remember that the world 
society should attempt to recover the activities  

in a sustainable manner to support both the 
climate in the future and ?? it is of course  

crucial to tackle the problems of pandemics 
and climate change together. We believe the  

most powerful tools to attain this goal are, of 
course, development of clean energy industries,  

renewables and, of course, modernizing the 
city infrastructure. That's from our side. 

Thank you. I think the points you raised 
are central for all the countries we're  

looking at here. During the pandemic, we've 
had changes to lifestyles. We've learned that  

we can make changes that are good for not 
only the environment, but maybe our health.  

And I think now we're at a stage where with 
the COP26 approaching at the end of this year  

and more and more countries thinking about how 
they're going to come out of the Corona crisis,  

which will mean in many cases public investment 
into the economy. To think about how this can be  

done in a way that is focused on green recovery, 
rather than recovery in the old form. So,  

I would like to ask each one of you if you might 
be able to say just a few more words about what  

you think the next steps are for your country. 
What are the things that we really need to do?  

In some countries, perhaps the low?hanging fruit 
has been picked, and now it means we need to look  

at more deeper changes into fossil fuel use, 
for example. And in other countries, perhaps  

we're still looking at transitions 
that are only just beginning.  

So, I'd like to give you all a chance, but this 
time we have to be a little bit shorter because  

we don't have so much time left in our session. 
To say just a few more words. And I'm going to go  

through what was originally planned in our 
speaking order and return with Ms. Nakabuye.  

Perhaps you can keep your comments 
to just a minute and a half or so. 

Okay. Thank you so much. The next steps for my 
country. My country is an agriculture country,  

just to let you know, and I think that this 
pandemic has come with a serious warning  

and it could mean a start of more pandemics, like 
I said earlier. And it's upon us, the people,  

who stay in this country and the people around to 
make sure that we come up with concrete actions  

that are more sustainable than they were, 
even before that step of the pandemic, and  

we also need to change the way we interaction 
with nature because this is really basic,  

especially the effects of the climate 
crisis. We know that most of the effects  

of the climate crisis are human induced, and 
that means that we humans are the major cause  

of the efforts of climate change. So we need 
to change the way we interact with nature.  

And I want to emphasize that we need a 
just transition. We need a just transition  

from fossil fuels to renewable energy. Africa, my 
continent, receives sunlight throughout the year,  

so that means we can generate 
solar energy throughout the year.  

If we do this, then why aren't we doing 
this already? We are short of resources,  

but if we get the support that we need from the 
global community, we can find these resources.  

These are some of the things that we should look 
out for, especially as in the global south. I urge  

Africans to look out for this solar energy, 
because we see sunlight throughout the year,  

and we should also be doing reforestation because 
most of our forests are cleared. One of the  

biggest issues we have in Africa is deforestation. 
In my country, Uganda, we are only left with 8% of  

our forest cover, and this is a very big issue 
because that is an energy debt. By energy debt,  

I mean that most of the energy used is 
coming from forests and mainly women face  

more trouble finding energy for domestic use 
and also other practices around the home.  

So I think we should have a just transition from 
fossil fuel to renewable energy, and Africa should  

look into solar energy because we produce sunlight 
throughout the year. Renewable energies should  

be the next sustainable thing to do. I think 
all countries should take this on. Thank you. 

Thank you, Ms. Nakabuye. And what 
you've said just now is a wonderful  

segue back to Ms. Howe, talking about 
future generations and just transition  

has something to do with your 
position, doesn't it, Ms. Howe? 

Absolutely. Wales is the only country who has 
legislated to protect the future generations  

and appointed an independent commissioner, myself, 
to oversee the implementation of that legislation.  

And as a result of that, you know, this provides 
a framework for accountability of our government,  

at both a national level and also at a local 
level. Because our Future Generations Act  

covers all 44 of our main public institutions in 
Wales. As a result of the Future Generations Act,  

we've seen a number of transformational policies 
and approaches being brought into practice over  

the last number of years. So the government has 
just produced a new economic resilience strategy  

which has well?being economics at its heart, and 
it's focused on a green and just economy. And,  

you know, where we're then looking at government 
support for the private sector, which is obviously  

increased substantially during the pandemic 
period, we have an economic contract which the  

private sector organizations must sign up to 
to demonstrate how they are decarbonizing, how  

they are helping to improve the skills of their 
workforce and also focusing on the health and  

well?being of their workforce. Like my colleague 
from Georgia, we've seen a substantial investment  

in sustainable transport. In the last budget 
following my challenges to the government around  

the need to make increased progress on reducing 
carbon emissions from transport. We've seen a 67%  

increase in funding to sustainable transport, 
which has meant that active travel routes have  

been rolled out and extended right throughout 
Wales. And, you know, the interesting approaches  

that have come from our Future Generations Act, 
where the requirements are to improve the social,  

economic, environmental and cultural 
well-being of Wales and to do that jointly,  

we've brought in different actors and different 
sectors together to find new solutions. So in our  

capital city, we had a public health consultant 
who has been slated with transportation strategy.  

That has lead to significant new investments 
in sustainable transports. We targeted that  

active transport routes, cycling routes and 
so on to things that have the lowest levels  

of life expectancy and the highest levels of air 
pollution. In constructing those cycle routes,  

we've taken into account our need to enhance and 
maintain diversity, and we've built those using  

green infrastructure. So I think we can find these 
really multi?fasciated solutions to addressing  

the challenges that are facing us. I think one of 
the other things we could do in terms of having a  

Future Generations Commissioner to call things 
out things that are clearly left to be done.  

So my challenge to the government has been 
around how they are analyzing the carbon impact  

of their spend. On the one hand, we see lack 
of investment and growing out national rails,  

sustainable transport, allowing renewable 
energy and so on. But on the other hand,  

if you look at our infrastructure investment plan, 
it's still very heavily focused on construction of  

new roads. So, therefore, it's absolutely right 
that we have someone independent calling that out.  

A similar scenario that some of our poorest 
communities at the beginning of last year  

were subjected to horrific experiences 
with flooding which, of course, are as  

a result of climate change. The areas ?? 
 
The area most affected by the flood that  

will cost millions and millions of pounds 
to address is also the area pension funds  

are investing the most in fossil fuels.
So the point that I'm making is we have  

to look at things wholistically. Big policy 
initiatives are good, but we also have to look  

elsewhere to make sure that things that we're 
already doing are not cancelling those things out. 

Thank you very much, and sorry about the 
interruption. But what you said nicely fits  

into our earlier speakers, the concerns about 
floods. The very important idea of investing  

green. Investing into green rather 
than to the brown future of the past.  

And thinking about transportation that is more 
climate friend. So, Ms. Tandilashvili, I'll  

let you have another two minutes here. Keep it 
short so we can get all the speakers in, please. 

Thank you very much. That's a very important 
question. And, to me, it's important that we  

all understand, each country understands 
that we are committed to implement our  

future climate policies successfully 
as it was planned before COVID?19.  

Also, let me state that our economy's 
responsibilities, of course, to communicate  

our ambitions throughout the nationally determined 
contribution documents, and also we do understand  

that we also need to have the long?term strategies 
on climate?friendly development pathways. And in  

this context, Georgia has already updated 
its international contribution document,  

which actually includes quite ambitious targets. 
And this means that Georgia makes an unconditional  

commitment to reduce emissions at the national 
level by 35% by 2030. To the levels registered in  

1990 and Georgia also makes a conditional 
commitment to reduce the total amount of emissions  

by 57% by 2030 compared to the year 1990. Provided 
that it will receive international financial  

assistance. And, of course, includes the targeted 
markets. We have developed a climate strategy and  

action plan which covers seven sectors of economy, 
starting from energy generation and transition to  

waste, buildings, transport, industry, agriculture 
and Forestry, and all of them have been in the  

transformation process and there are targets 
for each sectors to enable the country to reduce  

emissions and aiming to achieve the temperature 
goals of the Paris Agreement. And, of course,  

Georgia is also in the process of developing 
its long-term low emission development strategy,  

which should create the long-term vision for our 
country by achieving the carbon neutrality goal,  

and we expect that our government will approve the 
document, assuming that it will be sent to the UN  

secretary. In this regard, the document is 
an important document for the country, and  

not only for the environment 
of Georgia but also for other  

secretarial ministers as well. We had a massive 
consultation process with public authorities, with  

non-governmental civil society organizations, 
local organizations. And also the consultation  

with our Ministers of Economy and Finance 
and so on. Cooperation is very important if  

we are really going to achieve the goals 
that we envision to help in the context of  

climate action. And we do understand that climate 
change?related measures, implementation or  

adaptation can support our communities. This 
is also important with the community because  

without ?? we want to be able to achieve these 
results as well. Including social relationships  

and, of course, ecosystems and social well-being 
of our groups and communities in the country. And  

that's an important aspect when we are 
talking about our national priorities  

and targets. And international cooperation.
Really important, interesting, wonderful to  

hear that you're also thinking about Paris 
and what needs to come from Paris. I'd like  

to turn now to Minister Udaya Gammanpila. And, 
ambassador, you'll get to have the final words. 

Thank you. Actually, we have set a target of 
70% of renewable power generation by 2030.  

And in between as a transition measure, 
we are changing from coal to natural gas  

because Sri Lanka has the resource of natural 
gas offshore. Public transport and the use of  

electrical vehicles. A long term, of course, we 
will be achieve net carbon elimination by 2050.  

We are harnessing our wind and solar. We have 
already commenced discussions in this regard, and  

we welcome global innovators and other ministers 
to join hands with us to build up the technology.  

We are very happy to announce that ?? 
 
We have listened to the deforestation campaign. We  

are confident we will be able to achieve 
net carbon zero emission by 2050. Thank you. 

Thank you so very much. And the points you raise 
are so perfect. Green hydrogen. Re?forestation,  

renewables, and taking back comments from earlier 
presentations, such as Georgia, the idea of green  

investment, which I think brings us back to 
our climate ambassador, Ambassador Yoo, please. 

So, we try to have inclusivity in the policy. As 
we face the daunting task of overcoming COVID?19  

and the economic cross, it is important 
to make sure we do not leave anyone or  

any country behind in our recovery efforts. The 
secondary, with regard to the green recovery,  

COVID?19 has ironically brought us the opportunity 
to build back better and cleaner. It will be an  

important starting point to not only rebuild the 
economy, but also to provide a strong foundation  

for the longer term climate policies and 
actions. And finally, as for carbon neutrality,  

based on recovery, we hope the entire 
International Community will be able to align  

the short?term stimulus package with long-term 
goals as before. The recommendations of the IPPC  

as well as the goals set under the Paris 
Agreement of achieving carbon neutral by 2050  

will be important. It is an ambitious project for 
economies around the globe. Last, I want to say  

that discussions about climate change can 
be regarded as a dialogue between current  

and future generations. I believe the climate 
crisis is caused by the current generations,  

so the current generations are indebted to the 
future generation. I do believe the current  

generation is the last generation to protect the 
environment and to save the planet. Otherwise it  

is expected that we cannot live here because our 
earth might be uninhabitable. Thank you, Chair. 

Thank you, Ambassador Yoo. Your words are 
fitting final words for what has been a really  

excellent panel that tells us of the importance 
of inclusivity. Really making sure we think  

about the needs of the next generation while 
taking care of the needs of this generation.  

And we can only do that if we have a green 
recovery, a recovery that focuses on new  

transportation, trees and forests, and 
renewable energy and energy efficiency.  

You have been wonderful speakers 
today. I thank you very, very much  

and wish you all much success. And now I take the 
floor back to Melinda Crane. Thank you, everyone. 

And thank you so much Miranda Schreurs 
and a warm thanks also to all your guests.


