Minister of State Treveylan Anne Marie, distinguished colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, let us start with an experiment.

 Please close your eyes and imagine how energy will be generated and used in 2050.  What do you see? 

 I believe that we probably all see a similar picture.  A world 

where we use energy from solar and wind for lighting, heating and cooling or whatever it is.

Affordable, safe and environmentally friendly.  A world with safe, good jobs

 where people use clean cars, trucks, buses and trains. 

A climate neutral energy supply is both an opportunity and a necessity.

 We all knew the warnings from climate scientists and recommendations of economists and the needs of our people.

And still, not a lot†   not enough is being done on the climate action and the energy transition.  

Three weeks ago, the UN climate secretariat published a first synthesis report 

on the NDCs which have been submitted up until now. And this report is

 really disenchanting.  Two weeks ago, the International Energy Agency announced that energy related 

carbon emissions following a dent in 2020 due to the COVID 19 pandemic are rising rapidly once again.

And one week ago, UN environment and the University of Oxford published a study stating

that most of the economically friendly economic stimulus measures are limited to a few pioneering nations. 

So, how can we reach a climate neutral world?  The world we imagine for 2050.  So, Germany has made a lot of headway

in this direction, not least the energy sector.  This is also reflected by the current status on emission data published

by the Germany environment agency.  My goal is to meet our climate environment targets to remain successful industrialized nations

and at the same time improve our quality of life and cohesion in our country.  

Let me give you three examples to illustrate this point. Let me talk about the coal phase out first. 

The coal phase out in Germany is in full swing.  Following auctions,  

almost 5 gigawatts of coal power taken off the grid on the 1st of January. 

Including the plan which is one of the most modern in the world which started operation only 6 years ago. 

It will now produce green hydrogen which plays a central role in areas where 

 renewables cannot be used directly.  For example, the steel industry or in aviation.

Another place where hydrogen and synthetic fuels will be produced is the PTX lab which I launched this March.

 These are future technologies that give now prospects to coal regions.  Namely to become energy regions in a climate neutral Germany.

Apart from the coal phase out, Germany's also putting an end to the age of nuclear power.  Ten years after the Fukushima accident,

we are well aware that nuclear power is high risk, it is inflexible, it is expensive.  And handling the radioactive waste is

a problem that's unsolved around the world.  This is why nuclear power cannot be an instrument to promote climate action.

 And this is why at the end of the year, more power plants will be taken off the grid.  And the last three 

nuclear power plants in operation will be phased out at the end of 2022.  So, by phasing out coal and later gas,

we will completely modernize Germany's energy market.  This means that we need to 

expand energy much more quickly than in the past. Last year almost half

of Germany's electricity came from renewable energy.  The federal government 

has decided to increase this share to 65% by 2030. I believe that we need to redouble our efforts

in this area so that by 2050, 100% will be produced†   100% of the electricity will be produced from renewables. 

 And provide jobs and a resilient source of energy for households and the industry sector.  

Ladies and gentlemen, last year the EU adopted a new and ambitious climate target.  By 2030,  

we want to reduce our carbon emissions by 55% compared with 1990 levels.  That is a great step forward. 

An important milestone towards achieving climate neutrality by 2050. This now needs to be implemented across Europe.

The economy needs clear rules.  Frankly, behaving needs to become more attractive. 

The rising carbon price which now applies to the Germany transport and heating sectors is an important element here.  

The new EU taxonomy is another element.  It will help identify the right investments so that private capital

can be invested in sustainable and climate friendly projects.  And it's quite clear that investment in fossil energy and infrastructure 

and in the future in oil and gas projects will become increasingly risky. Providing incentives

for investments in climate friendly technology and infrastructure is a global challenge.  

Europe's and Germany's climate action can only be fully effective if other countries get on board.  The EU delivered

and now I expect the other big emitters also show how they want to raise the ambitions for global climate action.

In a clear and reliable manner.  And I'm optimistic that every country announcing they want to become climate neutral 

by the middle of the century. In Paris in 2050, we agreed that it would be reinforced, and the implementation accelerated.

Countries now need to deliver on this promise at the COP this November.  A lot needs to happen by then.

Ladies and gentlemen, let me end by picking up on an issue that is crucial for making

 the energy transition of climate neutrality a success. Namely, equal participation by men and women.

One week ago, we celebrated International Women's Day which is a national holiday here in Berlin, and rightly so.

Men and women are equal on paper.  However, we're still a long way from making this a reality.

And the current energy system is also disadvantaging women around the world in many respects.  

On health and access to electricity. The global energy transition can only become a success

if women are at the table, in the planning and decision making and implementation of the energy transition.

At the beginning of March, I discussed with many women at the first ever Women's Conference at my ministry.

And I am delighted that many successful women also have an active role at today's BETD.

Together we can have climate neutrality by 2050.  Let us be bold and optimistic. Then we will be able to create a world 

that's not only climate neutral, but also more secure, just and more resilient.  Thank you.


