The Africa-EU partnership is one of the key 
foreign policy priorities of the European  

commission. As close neighbours the two continents 
have huge opportunities for cooperation especially  

in the field of energy. And not only in solar 
but in all renewable energy technologies.  

At the same time the lack of access to clean 
energy in many African nations is still considered  

one of the biggest obstacles to economic 
progress and a better quality of life.  

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the 
growing urgency of the climate crisis  

have brought to light just how interdependent 
Africa and Europe are. This panel explores ways  

to strengthen the partnership between Africa 
and Europe and the role of organizations such  

as the Africa Union and the European Investment 
Bank as drivers of this emerging partnership.

We move into another Green Sofa talk and 
we want to explore how we build bridges  

between regions. In this case, Africa and 
Europe. And for those who weren't with  

us yesterday, just a very quick reminder 
about what our Green Sofa stands for.  

In the good old pre pandemic days, the sofa used 
to travel from continent to continent. And as a  

platform for international dialogue. And as 
a link between this forum and all the other  

networks and summits around the world that 
are also sharing our commitment to expediting  

the global green energy transition.
Since last year, like so much else,  

the Green Sofa has gone virtual. But it is 
still very much with us. And in this session,  

serves as a link between two close neighbors who 
is interdependence has been underlined not only  

bit pandemic, but also by the climate crisis.
Africa, as we heard several times yesterday,  

is set for strong economic and population growth 
over the next decade. Yet lack of access to clean  

energy remains an obstacle to social and economic 
justice. The EU Commission has declare the Africa  

EU partnership one of its top priorities. 
So, in this panel, we want to explore ways  

to strengthen cooperation across the entire 
renewable energy spectrum. The opportunities  

are there. That was a key message that we heard 
from a number of speakers yesterday as well. 

How do we make the most of those opportunities? 
That's the question we want to debate  

with four leading policymakers who 
are working to do just that. To  

maximize chances for the African Energiewende.
Ladies and gentlemen, we're also eager to hear  

from you. So, please do send us your questions 
and I'll try to bring them in toward the end of  

the panel, time permitting. And I will now keep 
the introductions short in the interest of time.  

Dr. Abou Zeid Az is commissioner for 
infrastructure and energy at the African Union  

Commission. Welcome. Great to have you with us. 
Dr. Werner Hoyer is President of the European  

investment bank, the EIB. Thank you so much 
for joining the panel. Hello. Dr. Ajay Mathur  

is the director of the International Solar 
Alliance. Wonderful to have you with us.  

And Dr. Mohamed Shaker El Markabi is Minister 
of Electricity and renewable energy for Egypt.  

So, wonderful that you could all be with us this 
morning. And we want to start out by getting a  

first take on the challenges and on where things 
stand in Africa as a result of the pandemic. 

Experts warn that Africa will be slow to recover 
from COVID 19. Slower than in many other regions  

of the world. Which, of course, poses a 
real threat to socioeconomic progress. So,  

what does that mean for green growth? That's 
the first thing I would like to hear from  

all of you. And may I kindly remind 
you, dear speakers, that as always,  

we're on a very tight schedule. So, I would 
truly be grateful if you would keep your answers  

to around 2 minutes each. Thank you so much 
for that. And let me start with Dr. Abou Zeid. 

Hello, Melinda. Really happy to join you on 
the Green Sofa even though we're doing this  

virtually. At the outset, I would like to warn 
the participants that you and I did not coordinate  

the color of our jackets. It just happened 
that we are both wearing the same color today.  

But back to your question.
There is no doubt that COVID 19 has  

exacerbated the already existing socioeconomic 
challenges faced by our continent, Africa.  

Which include poverty and food insecurity 
and climate change as well as lack of access  

to modern infrastructure and poverty, health 
services. The pandemic also showed us, you know,  

the importance of access to energy. Especially 
in rural areas. Knowing that there are care  

facilities in many rural areas in Africa. Only 
25% of them have reliable sources of energy. 

However, the impact of the ongoing pandemic 
on the progress of the continent has served  

also as a wake up call for African stakeholders to 
double our efforts in addressing these challenges.  

We are committed in Africa to pursuing a 
transformation of green development pathway that  

is low carbon and climate resilient. Which will 
also promote both economic and human development  

as, you know, as our agenda    
the agenda of the African    

And why I'm saying this and why specifically 
green energy? Because it also reminded us all  

of the issue of energy security. And now that    
last year particularly when the supply chains were  

interrupted, we had to rely on what is available 
here and now. And what is best then and in energy,  

which is readily available in the continent. There 
are so many forms of renewable energy available. 

Now, in the African Union, we are 
doing the recovery from COVID 19  

as a catalyst for accelerating the green 
growth on the continent. The energy sector  

and Africa has ample opportunities to use it.  

I mean, as I said, there are renewable 
energy resources and the combination of  

grid systems are being, you know, explored 
which is important to address the challenge of  

development. But also, the climate challenge and 
also the recovery and resilience of the continent. 

We already incorporated a regional program. 
Program for infrastructure development in Africa.  

Either in terms of green. But also, the rural 
   the rural areas. We are accelerating or  

intensifying many partnerships that we have with 
Europe in that field. Why they are exploring and  

continue to explore the geothermal energy 
particularly in East Africa. The bio energy,  

the energy efficiency. The single African 
energy market and so many other areas. 

So, we are viewing this crisis, this challenge as 
a catalyst, as I said. And you say    experts say,  

well, let us maybe surprise the experts 
and surprise everybody and use this  

crisis as an opportunity to work on 
the standards in the energy sector. 

Thank you very much, Dr. Abou Zeid. And that very 
much dovetails with what we heard yesterday from  

a couple of different speakers including 
John Kerry and others who said this is  

an opportunity to re-plug and foster cooperation 
between African countries about best practices  

and different pathways suited to local needs.
Let me move on to Minister Mohamed Shaker  

El Markabi now. About how you see the effects 
of the pandemic playing out in terms of whether  

it could slow the green energy transition in 
your country and also in Africa generally. 

Hello, everybody. Thank you very much for 
introducing me to you, to this panel. Actually,  

I believe that definitely the pandemic  

will have some effect. However, 
let me talk about our situation  

with renewables. We applied to many other 
places. We developed a strategy and the tools  

to increase the introduction of the renewable 
energy in our energy mix. By 30% by 2025.  

And there is a plan and a specific 
addition every year. And everything. 

And to the point, it's such that actually we would 
not    were not effective very much in our    we  

were not affected by the pandemic in our plan. And  

we are working and so far, we introduced the 
network about over 6,000 megawatts of renewables.  

And lately, we're going to even design about 
2200 megawatts of investment in the    in '21.  

Definitely it has not affected much on our plan 
for the renewables. However, it affects actually  

our demand of electricity in general as a country. 
We are supposed to increase it. Currently we're  

facing about 9% reduction than what we expected. 
It has an effect. However, we work very hard and  

hope to keep going correctly in our program.
And let me just tell you, actually, we  

established the largest solar farm in 
the world so far with 1465 megawatts  

in the farm. It is working. Basically, it's 100% 
efficient. So, I believe, actually, if we stay  

   if we stick to our plans correctly and we make 
sure    we can get over this. Thank you for that. 

Thank you very much for that upbeat message. 
And I see that the International Solar Alliance  

Dr. Mathur is not with us at the moment. I think 
we're having difficulty with the line. I will go  

to Werner Hoyer and ask a slightly different 
form of the same question. Which is this:  

In light of the challenges that we're hearing 
about the after effects of the pandemic shrinking  

economies in Africa as in so many other places, 
how is the EIB engaging with Africa under these  

circumstances when it comes to energy transition?
To put it very short. Stronger and stronger.  

Because for us, the European Union, and that means 
also for the financial arm of the European Union,  

our relationship with Africa is of key 
importance. Key strategic importance.  

For us at the European Investment Bank the COVID 
recovery and our planet's repair must be two sides  

to the same coin. What we have for COVID recovery 
is money from future generations. We cannot use  

those resources to lock in policies that leave 
them with a mountain of debt on a broken planet. 

And we need to transform that. And we 
need to seize that opportunity now.  

I am often confronted with the criticism 
that the idea of linking economic recovery  

with our green ambitions will hurt us. The climate 
means that the economies are where the poorer  

countries ultimately lose out. I cannot and do not 
to want to accept this logic. If we invest well,  

climate protection and economic growth will 
not stand in conflict to one another. And  

sustainability, the argument is that it doesn't 
create growth in the long term. But the strength  

asset, it's totally underestimated in the 
political discussion. And the discussion is  

ahead of us. To see all of the participants 
around the world, saying that we must move  

out of unabated fossil fuels. Avoid situations 
where in 10, 15, 20 years that allow us to be  

strong assets. It's not an economic thing. 
It's not the energy, it's good economics.  

This is important for countries in Africa.
I have heard the words "Leapfrog" into  

development. That's indeed, we need to 
leapfrog that and transition into a clean,  

sustainable energy that will be    that has been 
the expertise, the knowledge, the support. And  

the possibilities to support the implementation 
globally and the bank has both the financial  

clout and the advisory capacity to 
help in this process, so we are ready. 

Thank you very much. And the 
problem of stranded assets  

certainly isn't something we were ignoring at 
the BETD. In fact, it was mentioned many times  

yesterday in the course of our discussions. 
Particularly discussions regarding leveraging  

money for green investments. I see that 
we do have Dr. Mathur with us again. So,  

let's    let's give this a try and hopefully 
the technology is working in our favor now,  

Dr. Mathur. Would you give us your perspective 
on what the pandemic and the associated economic  

slowdown mean for the prospects of energy 
transition in Africa? We've heard both Minister  

El Markabi and Minister Abou Zeid saying that 
the economic recovery offers opportunities. 

Do you see it the same way? Or no, there are 
some challenges now for the green transition?  

Okay. I'm afraid his line is still not working. 
Very unfortunate. Let me go back to Minister  

El Markabi and Commissioner Abou Zeid to 
talk a little bit about what you study  

as effective focus for green partnership 
between Europe and Africa. How could an  

African European energy partnership Hope to 
support green recovery and in fact maximize  

those opportunities you've both talked about? I 
would start with Commissioner Abou Zeid, please. 

Thank you. First of all, we are already 
collaborating and partnering with Europe  

on green energy and green energy 
transition. This is not new. And  

on a large number of programs and initiatives. 
I did mention that bio energy. I did mention  

that renewable energy program, the geothermal. 
Programs, and so many other large programs and  

initiatives. What we are now    and since 
last year, by the way, I mean, what we  

are doing is we are in this partnership 
to focus or re focus on certain things.  

And I would mention that particularly 
off grid. Why? Because this Nexus,  

energy, digital, offers, you know, a 
fantastic opportunity to accelerate and  

the access to energy in rural areas. 
And the introduction of the private  

sector as small and medium also in that sector.
We are, again, visiting or insisting on energy.  

From production to consumption, it's a fantastic 
opportunity to have in that sense. And what is  

also being expressed about in this 
especially this last year is tea  

and cooking. I'm sorry to say it's often not 
spoken or talked about in    enough as we would  

hope and think. Nine hundred million Africans use 
very polluting ways for cooking. Cutting woods.  

Firewood and stuff like that, you know, for 
cooking. Results in a large number of deaths.  

Much more than covered, by the way, we are talking 
400,000 people per year. Whereas the number  

for COVID    or due to COVID    is only 100,000. 
A big tragedy, but not related to issues  

related to cooking. So, we are revisiting our 
existing partnerships in the large programs that  

we are having with our historic partners, the 
European Union and all the European countries. 

To address not only the emergency 
needs, but also medium and longer term  

related to energy transition. We are making 
use also of the fact that    which works in  

favor of renewable energy. Because governments 
can now reduce the subsidies to fossil fuel and  

focus their attention to    to a renewable 
energy. And I    I, again, maybe the discussion  

will come to that again. That new element 
maybe in the partnership not only with Europe,  

but with all our partners is to make sure that 
is an important place for the    to play in the  

energy sector at large in Africa. And we have 
excellent examples within the continent. And  

I hope his excellency, Minister Mature will 
talk about that. Because Egypt has a fantastic  

experience in making sure that small, medium and 
large target sector very much involved in the  

production and distribution of renewable energy.
Thank you very much. And I will put that question  

to the Minister Mohamed Shaker El Markabi. 
But Dr. Mathur is on the line. The consensus  

of green recovery from the pandemic, as much 
misery and economic burden that the pandemic  

caused, nevertheless, that the recovery does 
offer opportunities to leapfrog and also to  

bring forward progress on renewables. And, of 
course, Africa is blessed with an abundant solar  

energy. Nonetheless, as we know, the challenges of 
building a reliable grid for solar are daunting.  

And in fact, yesterday we talked about the fact 
that I think it's 300 million Africans lack power  

altogether. So, can you talk a little bit about 
what kind of investments would be needed within  

an African European energy partnership in order 
to try to bring that grid development forward? 

Many times, and I'm glad to finally connected. 
Absolutely delighted to be part of the  

Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue. A few points 
to make. The first is we have various kinds of  

consumers and what each one of them needs is very 
different. The second point that I wanted to make  

is that ultimately, the rationale for the move 
to renewables obviously is driven by the fact  

that solar. But it's also driven by the fact 
that as was just mentioned, it provides cleaner  

kitchens. It is more economical. It needs to 
lower pollution. There's a greater autonomy.  

You don't have to depend on an external source 
to provide electricity. So, whatever makes sense. 

Let me expand a little bit. Want first part 
that I think is important is every place has  

its own rationale. And I think we need to 
focus on that. And therefore, evaluating  

solarization opportunities for the region with, 
for example, us with our members and partners  

is the highest priority. It is that benefit 
which needs to be communicated both to the  

government and to the people which is why the 
acceptance brings us to the first issue. So,  

in some places, it would be solar, and the 
grids that are important. In other places     

which could be interactive with the grid 
because grid reliability is a continuing issue.  

But overall, building back better, which has been 
backed by the leaders, championed by our President  

is focusing on the infrastructure, food and water. 
And I think this is what is important to overcome  

the crisis of climate change and COVID.
At the end of the day,  

what also matters is that we are able to 
focus on ensuring that in all of these areas,  

people develop skills and jobs. There's always 
this question about what comes first. The assets,  

or people's capabilities. There's no right 
answer. The capabilities have to come  

a little bit before the assets coming. I think 
one of the key issues in developing this market,  

taking advantage of the recovery, is to invest 
in the creation of the skills. This could be at  

the policy level, could be at the banking level. 
Could be at the level of the people who design  

the systems, invent the systems, monitor the 
systems. It is this capacity building which  

I believe has to be an essential part. Apart from 
taking the mechanisms so that the commercial flows  

can go into the investment in these systems.
Is that an area where you would say that is  

largely a responsibility for national governments? 
Or would you say there's also a very real role for  

European African energy partnership in that 
area of skills, training and capacity building? 

Well, there's a very clear need for inter country 
cooperation. Cooperation with Europe, but also  

with other countries. I from my place tend to look 
at three concentric pillars of investment. In many  

cases, it is viable by itself. In many cases, you 
need subsidies where the inter country cooperation  

is important. The second concentric pillar is 
around what is needed to make that transaction  

with the risk mechanisms. The guarantees, whether 
it's policies, or whether it is the kind of  

mechanisms to ensure that    these are jointly the 
possibility of both of the country itself as well  

as of its partners like Europe. Then there's the 
power grid which is creating the infrastructure. 

This includes a capacity building. This includes 
the preparation of the banking sector to provide  

resources. It includes the preparation of the 
electricity sector to buy this electricity.  

And as far as this is concerned, this    
the countries lack the number of people  

who are creating these issues. This can 
only account to inter country cooperation. 

Thank you. Thank you very much for that. I've 
got one eye on the clock, dear speakers. And  

I see that in fact we have not a lot of time 
left. Around 5 minutes. Let me come back first  

to Minister El Markabi and then to Werner Hoyer 
to talk about how the cooperation both within the  

EU African energy partnership. But also, 
between countries and the private sector  

can lead forward the green and renewable 
transition in Africa. So, Minister El Markabi,  

Dr. Abou Zeid mentioned that you have found 
some very successful ways to cooperate with  

the private sector. Maybe you want to start 
off by telling us a word or two about that. 

Yes. Thank you very much for that. We have 
the potential of the renewable energy.  

We have with the people, up to 90,000 
megawatts of renewable with the solar  

and wind. So, I would really like to 
get the extent of the private sector  

for the investment in this direction. We started 
actually 5 years ago. And we need    in Paris. And  

there is a lot of    the success with that to 
the extent that we are a partner. It was about  

32 different international and local 
investors in order to work on the job.  

And it's been realized. And as I said, we have 
the largest solar farm in the world so far. 

It might be to work with the    with the 
other countries. We know that Egypt is  

strengthened. It's formed an international 
network in order to really interconnect with  

Africa, sorry with Europe. And to apply this as 
well. So, I believe actually one of the decisions  

that we have to consider on the interconnection 
and the strengthening of the network itself. All  

over the continent and to make sure that 
Egypt could be one corridor to transfer  

power from Africa to   green power from Africa 
to Europe and to make money out that have. 

In order to attract the attention, we 
did a lot of attractions. By the way,  

we have souverain guaranty issued by the Minister 
of finance in Egypt, and we have a bankable  

agreement and environmental. And we worked with 
the    to make it easier for any investors to  

come. And I believe this could be an example which 
can be applied to many other countries. Thank you. 

Thank you so much for that, Mohamed Shaker 
El Markabi. And now back to Werner Hoyer for final  

words, as it were. Yesterday, again and again 
we heard many speakers saying particularly when  

it comes to Africa. We need to see money on the 
table. We're talking about billions of Euros in  

investments that will be needed for the energy 
transition. So, what can you do at the EIB within  

this African EU energy partnership to leverage 
funding also from the private sector to really  

maximize that money that will be put at the 
disposal of the green energy transition? 

First of all, we need bank projects. 
When it comes, for instance,  

to the electricity sector, to renewable energy, 
we need the private sector to develop that. That  

requires a project to work for the environment. 
We need to facilitate the private sector  

in order to do so. That's the one thing.
The second is because the private sector money  

is available. But it must be channeled 
into projects which are transparent,  

which show sustainability and also competency. 
That is sometimes not the case. The second thing,  

we are aware of discussing at length yesterday the 
enormous energy needs in Africa. And particularly  

when it comes to electricity. If these electricity 
needs are served by technologies, then the current  

SDGs will go up in flames. We need to have the 
best technologies and make a quantum leap in  

development and technology. And that requires a 
departure from the idea that innovation, climate  

and development tools are three separate areas. 
No, they must be seen together. And if we do that,  

I believe we can come up with a clear exercise. 
And we are creative also when it comes to linking  

different kinds of energy sources and different 
kind of energy grids or transports. For instance,  

together with the International Solar Alliance, 
we are preparing for the next month study  

on the connection with the off grid. Mini grids.
That will come out soon. And off grid reaches the  

non connected and underserved communities. And we 
have supplies when it comes to off grid in rural  

and fragile countries and areas. And discussing 
it in terms of money and as of last time, there  

is also a very positive    
in this whole thing. Because  

this is    this propulsion project affects women 
who spend more time in the domestic environment.  

So, we have to see these things together 
from the different kinds of energy sources  

and the ways of energy transportation. And 
also, from a social and inclusion part. 

Doctor, may I ask a quick follow up question with 
a request for a response. We heard Dr. Mathur talk  

about the capacity needs in the areas of training 
and so on. What about bankable projects. Do you  

have opportunities at the EIB? Or do you work with 
partners who have opportunities to do capacity  

building in terms of bankable projects? Because 
this is something I hear a lot that structuring  

those    those finance requests, those bankable 
projects, is also a real challenge. I see Dr.  

Abou Zeid raising her hand. So, two sentences 
from Dr. Hoyer and to over you, Madam Abou Zeid. 

Yeah, in general education. It's an issue that 
needs to be served by international political  

foundations. And when it comes to the capacity 
and to train and skill people in order to make  

   to set up bankable projects, then we are there 
to help. The EIB, we are thinking of our bank.  

Since the beginnings two thirds of a century 
ago, it is to provide lending not from a bank  

and also the EU sources that we can 
bring in and also capacity advising. So,  

blending and advising always go together 
for EIB and we do this in Africa as well. 

Thank you very much. Over to 
madam Abou Zeid. A half a minute. 

To the point that was announced, and we have 
a facility that is in Africa that is to    

particularly for that purpose. The preparedness of 
the projects to make sure that they are bankable,  

and their challenge now is    it factors them 
in a way that    for there to be attracted to  

private investments. In addition to according 
to the initiative that we're having, Africa 50,  

specifically to address this point and to address 
the private sector, Africa and not Africa. But I  

wanted to also highlight that investments do 
not come in a vacuum. We need innovations and  

strategies for that, and we need complement    
because the aid needs to work with the continent.  

That's why we have the African energy market. 
To harmonize the policies and the regulations  

across the country and create an economy of scale 
that's also able to attract the private sector. 

And Melinda, allow me, I keep saying the 
needs, the needs. A need in energy is also  

an opportunity for investment if well packaged. 
So, let us talk about that    the opportunities  

and these fantastic investment opportunities 
that increased on the continent and to work  

together    continue working together with 
Europe in order to harness this opportunity  

and make it work for our continent. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Dr. Abou Zeid. Dr. Hoyer,  

Dr. Mathur, Minister El Markabi 
for this very, very interesting  

and thought provoking discussion. 
We appreciate you being with us.


