Our next speaker is distinguished professor of 
atmospheric science at Penn State. Also in the  

United States. He has pioneered techniques 
to find patterns in the climate data. He has  

also found himself fighting not only climate 
denial, but also doomsday thinking when it comes  

to the climate crisis. His most recent book, 
one of many, is entitled "the New Climate War:  

The Fight to Take Back our Planet". It's 
a great pleasure to welcome Michael Mann. 

Thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be 
speaking to you today at this important event.  

And the presentation, which 
should be coming up shortly.  

There we are. Okay. Well, thanks again. 
So, I'm going to talk about opportunities,  

the opportunities that we have to address the 
climate crisis, but also some of the challenges  

that still remain. And this is, indeed, the focus 
of my new book, "How to Win the New Climate War,"  

which I'm thrilled to say is available in 
German. As Secretary Granholm alluded to,  

we are so close. This is our moment. This 
is our time, but we do have some obstacles  

in our way, and we have to recognize them if 
we are going to rise to the challenge. First,  

just a little bit about the basic science here. 
You know, I'm not going to show the projections  

of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
I'm going to show you some projections from 1982  

in a document that was unearthed. An internal 
document from Exxon Mobil. This is an estimate by  

Exxon Mobil's own scientists in the early 1980s 
of the increase in the concentration of carbon  

pollution, of carbon dioxide and the resulting 
warning that would be expected in the future. And  

they predicted back in 1982, both the increase in 
carbon dioxide and the warming that would result.  

Now, they were able to make that prediction 
that we would remain addicted to fossil fuel  

and that we would elevate the levels of CO2 in 
the atmosphere up to nearly 420 part per million. 

And part of what we did that is Exxon Mobil and 
other fossil fuel companies rather than coming  

public when they knew we had a problem on our 
hands instead engaged in a multi?million?dollar  

campaign to discredit the science 
of climate change. To discredit  

independent scientists who had 
actually come to the same conclusions  

as their own scientists. And this is the 
so?called climate wars that I've alluded to. 

Now, if we had acted decades ago when we knew we 
had a problem, with Exxon Mobil and other fossil  

fuel companies knew we had a problem, it would 
have been a fairly straightforward matter to  

bring our carbon emissions down in time to avoid 
a catastrophic 1.5 degree Celsius warning. What  

decades of inaction have bought us, unfortunately, 
is a much steeper challenge. We need to  

bring down our carbon emissions much more quickly 
now. That's the opportunity cost of decades of  

inaction due to the war on climate action. The 
impacts, you know, we don't need to use our  

imagination anymore. They're playing out in real 
time in our headlines, in our social media feeds,  

on our television screens. Unprecedented heat 
waves and wildfires and floods and superstorms.  

In fact, this year, we saw the hottest temperature  

ever reliably recorded on this planet in Death 
Valley, California, 130 degrees Fahrenheit.  

While wildfires were blazing out west, 
California, Oregon, Washington, Colorado,  

we witnessed the most active hurricane 
season on record in the Atlantic Basin.  

This is the face of climate change. It's no 
longer subtle. It's staring us in the face. 

So, this is what 1 degree 
Celsius of warming has done.  

Imagine 4 or 5 degrees Celsius. If we fail to 
address this challenge, we will witness ever?worse  

impacts that go well beyond anything we have seen 
in the historical record. That's the bad news. The  

good news is there is still time to do something 
about it. To avoid those impacts. But we haven't  

countered this challenge, efforts by fossil 
fuel companies and those promoting their agenda  

to discredit the science. I've come up 
against those efforts in my own work.  

In my own outreach on climate change. But here's 
the thing. The impacts of climate change have  

become so obvious to the person on the street that 
it just isn't credible anymore to deny the reality  

of climate change. And so we've largely seen 
an end to that assault on the basic scientific  

evidence. If you like, the old climate war, but 
polluters haven't given up. The forces of inaction  

or the interactivists as I call them in the book 
haven't given up, they've just turned to a whole  

new array of tactics in their efforts to delay 
action to prevent this transition away from fossil  

fuels. It consists of soft denial. Well, climate 
change may be real, but it's not a problem.  

It's been overblown. It's been exaggerated. We 
can continue to burn fossil fuels. No problem.  

Or we'll just adapt. We don't have to reduce those 
carbon emissions, we'll just adapt to the changes  

that have come and the changes, the additional 
changes that are in store. Or we will geo?engineer  

our way out of the problem. Bill Gates 
has a book out now about climate change  

and he does, in fact, advocate for geo?engineering 
in an effort to somehow offset the warming effect  

of carbon pollution, and yet there are potential 
unintended consequences if we go down that road. 

We also see deflection. We don't need a 
price on carbon. We don't need subsidies  

for renewable energy. We don't need to stop 
developing new fossil fuel infrastructure.  

The solution is just on individuals. It's just on 
us. We just need to change our diet. We just need  

to change our way of travel. It's an effort 
to deflect attention away from the needed  

systemic changes, the needed policy solutions. 
Individual action is important, and we should  

all do those things we can to minimize our 
impact on the environment and the climate,  

but individual action alone isn't going 
to be adequate. We need systemic change.  

We see efforts to divide the climate 
advocacy community by attacking some of our  

leading thinkers, our opinion leaders, thought 
leaders, more prominent advocates. Attacking them,  

attempting to discredit them as hypocrites because 
of their personal ?? their personal behavior.  

Whether they fly, what their diet 
is, how much electricity they use.  

And it's been quite effective.  

There is, in fact, quite a division now within 
the climate community. You have prominent  

progressives like Michael Moore who are now 
attacking renewable energy. The primary solution  

to the climate crisis that we have available. And 
that message ironically is trumped by conservative  

media organizations and fossil fuel front groups. 
Again, creating division within the community so  

that we don't act with one voice demanding change.
And then there's doomism, doom and despair. If we  

come to believe that it's too late to do 
anything about the problem and it's not,  

that potentially leads us down the same 
path of inaction as outright denial.  

And the forces of inaction, they 
don't care about the path you take,  

they just care about the destination. They want 
you disengaged. And whether it's because you deny  

climate change is real or you don't think 
it's possible to do anything about it,  

that puts you in the position of disengagement. 
You're not out there demanding change. So,  

what do we need to do? We need to convey both 
the urgency and the agency. Yes, we have to act  

now. Dangerous climate change, by some measure, 
has already arrived, but there is agency. We can  

prevent the worst impacts of climate change if 
we act boldly now. We know what the solution is.  

We don't need a miracle, bill Gates. We already 
have the solutions. We just have to deploy them.  

We have to scale them up. And then finally, we 
are seeing carbon emissions come down. During this  

past year because of the pandemic, they came down 
7%. Much of that was due to the social distancing  

and the lockdown policies, but some of that was 
due to the continued decarbonization of the global  

economy. We are seeing carbon emissions start 
to bring them down. The challenge now is to keep  

bringing them down by 7% every year for the next 
ten years. And personal, individual change alone  

isn't gonna do it. We need those systemic changes, 
we need those policies that will encourage  

the rapid decarbonization of our economy. I'm 
optimistic that we can do this. We have a shift  

in the political winds. We already heard about 
that. The Biden Administration is acting boldly.  

The US is now once again displaying leadership, 
bringing the world community together. The US is  

back and it's really once again to lead, and that 
has huge implications for our efforts to address  

this crisis over the ensuing years. And the youth 
climate movement. The fact that our children  

have recentered this conversation where 
it always needed to be, about our ethical  

obligation not to destroy this planet for future 
generations. That's the way we need to think  

about this problem. That's the urgency. That's 
why we have to act now. And I believe we will.  

Thank you.
Michael Mann, thank you very much.


