Dr. Ursufla von der Leyen, Peter Altmaier, 
Miss Crane, ladies and gentlemen,  

five, 10 or 20 years from now when we look 
back at today and on this global pandemic,  

what will we remember? Will it be the 
current debate about vaccine shortages?  

Incidence rates and high risk areas? Probably 
not. Because as much as these things shape  

our day to day life now, memories do 
fade. And we live in a fast paced era.  

Yet, two things we experienced during this crisis 
will remain. Firstly, there is the experience of  

what exponential growth actually means and all 
the future consequences this can have in both in a  

pandemic and in a climate crisis that researchers 
have been warning us about for decades.  

Against this exponential growth.
Secondly, during this crisis,  

we have learned that we're not powerless 
if we act decisively and together as one.  

We have learned that even global disasters can 
be managed with the help of science and reason.  

Effective vaccines have been developed over just 
a few months. And through our behavior, on the one  

hand, we have accelerated the infection rates. 
But we have also flattened the curve. So, this,  

yes, we can, attitude, ladies and gentlemen, is 
what we need for the energy transition as well.
 

And John Kerry will be speaking to us 
this afternoon who is, of course, right  

when he says that this key to solving 
the climate crisis lies in energy policy.  

And with this, I would like to warmly welcome you 
to the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue in the  

Federal Foreign Office. Today we're going to put 
the global energy transition on the right track.
 

And over the last few months, I have grown much 
more confident that we can succeed. Because  

today voices from around the world are calling 
for climate action louder than ever before.  

Europe has set itself the goal of becoming the 
world's first climate neutral continent by 2050.  

And during the German presidency of the EU 
Council, we have accelerated steps in this  

direction. We are aiming to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by 50% compared to 1990 levels by 2030.  

Important partners around the world, 
China, Japan, South Africa, south Korea  

have joined the effort and also 
committed themselves to achieving  

climate neutrality. And the 
United States is back on board.
 

Also, interest in this event has never been 
greater. More than 50 Ministers of Foreign Affairs  

and Energy on all continents will be taking part 
in the virtual panel discussions. People from all  

around the world will be following this conference 
online. It's a pleasure to have you with us.
 

I think we all free that the 2020s must become a 
decade of investment in sustainable technology.  

The European Green Deal of the European Commission  

is a major driver behind this effort. And I'm sure 
we will be getting more details about this soon.
 

The green recovery and an energy transition 
sees itself for an economic upturn and social  

revitalization is also what will guide us out 
of the coronavirus crisis. Comprehensive carbon  

pricing and ensuring a level playing field through 
a carbon border adjustment that follows the rules.  

We should work on this together including 
with the United States in the coming months.  

Not least with the eye to the EU conference in 
Glasgow in a few months. Ladies and gentlemen,  

we are doomed to concern. We must succeed if we 
want to achieve the goal of climate neutrality.
 

But the path leading there won't be straight line. 
Climate neutrality is more than wind turbines,  

electric vehicles and charging points. It's also 
about a global power shift. About energy security,  

about the restructuring of trade flows and 
about securing access to water and food.
 

I would like to illustrate this 
with a key example: Hydrogen.  

Alongside renewable sources of energy, 
hydrogen offers the best way out of the  

global climate disaster that 
fossil fuels have got us into.  

Subsequently, a future market is taking place 
in this domain. If oil was called "Black gold,"  

then the gold of the future is invisible. To 
date, fossil fuels have shaped the political  

and economic map of the world. Entire regions 
have benefited from them. They have given  

rise to global corporations such as Chevron, 
BP and Shell as well as cartels like OPEC.  

Trade routes have become critical 
locations for the global economy.
 

Time and again oil has triggered conflicts 
between states, especially in the Middle East.  

All of this, ladies and gentlemen, 
is set to change. At the same time,  

now and more inclusive energy spaces 
will arise, and this will happen  

around the world because hydrogen can be 
produced almost anywhere on the planet.  

Seizing this opportunity and at the same time 
minimizing the risks of the global energy  

policy transformation. That's what we aim to do 
with our foreign policy on hydrogen. First and  

foremost, we need to build new partnerships.
Even in 2050,  

German and the EU will need to import large 
quantities of energy, especially in the form of  

hydrogen. For this, we will need close cooperation 
with all the regions of the world. Chile, Morocco,  

Australia, we're already seeing large pilot plants 
for the production of green hydrogen constructed  

with the help of energy. And build on that. 
Germany will be investing 2 billion Euros  

to stimulate the hydrogen energy 
market. Secondly, we must support  

today's exporters of fossil fuels if we want to 
avoid disruptions on the global political stage.
 

The Federal Foreign Office will expand the 
dialogue with Russia, Saudi Arabia and others  

to encourage them to adapt their business 
models in time. As part of these efforts,  

we're currently working on establishing 
hydrogen offices with among others Moscow and  

others. Thirdly, a future global hydrogen 
market must be open to everyone. That  

will only happen through binding international 
agreements. This means looking at, for example,  

how we want to define green hydrogen and examining 
issues such as market access and connectivity.
 

We're engaged in prospective discussions 
with the International Energy Agency,  

international energy and the G20. 
Together with the European Commission,  

we are drafting international 
standards for green hydrogen  

along with funding instruments and 
certification models for green hydrogen.
 

Ladies and gentlemen, a deadline of just under 
30 years for achieving climate neutrality doesn't  

leave much time for the technological, political 
and social transformation this will require.  

But let us recall the great strength we have 
summoned to fight the pandemic. We are not only  

the first generation in the history of the world 
that can beat back such a pandemic in the space of  

only a few months, we're also the last generation 
that can prevent climate collapse. And most  

importantly, we are anything but powerless.
Therein, ladies and gentlemen, lies the  

opportunity of this century. It's our 
opportunity. Thank you very much.


