Electricity networks worldwide see 
dramatic increases in power demand.  

Solar, and wind power capacities are being 
added in large quantities globally every day.  

At the same time digitization deeply impacts the 
energy sector connecting everybody to everything,  

with many new market opportunities.
Smart market designs help to seize these  

opportunities f.i. with prosumer models. But 
there are also risks such as new monopolies.  

How can these new paradigms be combined 
to accelerate the energy transition?

That, indeed, is our topic. I think I hardly 
need to remind you, ladies and gentlemen,  

that intermitted, distributed 
measuring renewable energy sources  

do pose a challenge for a market created a 
decade ago for a world powered by fossil fuels.  

How does this industry move from predictable 
generation models to a far more variable grid  

that is responsive to supply and demand and the 
environment? Digital technologies, as we were  

just reminded by the film, are a very key part of 
that solution, and actors across the value chain  

are moving to adopt them. To facilitate and scale 
up their efforts coherent policy signals will be  

absolutely critical. So, in this panel, we want 
to look at the state of the market and assess both  

benefits and risks. How can smart market design 
maximize opportunities for green business models  

and what risks and challenges are involved also 
in the digitalization of energy systems. And  

we've got an outstanding panel. I'm going to 
introduce them in just a moment, but I do want  

to take a look at how you're responding to the 
first of our audience polls. We asked you which  

objects and words come to your mind when thinking 
of smart energy market designs, and you're already  

avidly answering that question. I'm going to give 
you a little more time to do so while I introduce  

our panelists, and then we're going to come back 
and look at what the main words and terms are  

that you consider important. So, I will now keep 
our introductions really short to maximize our  

time for discussion. And it's a great pleasure to 
welcome the Vice Minister in Vietnam's ministry of  

industry of Energy and Trade. The former President 
and CEO of Vietnam's national Load Dispatch Center  

for Electricity. It's great to have with us 
Antonella Battaglini, CEO of the Renewables  

Grid Initiative which is a collaboration of NGOs 
and TSOs from across Europe promoting sustainable  

grid development. Great to have you with us. 
Also very pleased to welcome Stefan Kapferer, CEO  

of 50hertz. And finally, very pleased that 
Jo-Jo Hubbard can join us. CEO and co?founder of  

Electron, a startup digital platform connecting 
users across multiple markets and networks. So  

let's just quickly go back to that word cloud 
and take a look at what our audience thinks are  

the most important words and terms that occur 
to them. Decentralization, optimized grids,  

micro-grids, demand flexibility, smart grid. 
And the smaller print has everything from smart  

metering to sector coupling, realtime pricing, 
flexibility absolutely crucial here, sufficiency  

and more. So, bearing all that in mind, dear 
panel, let me now ask all of you, what challenges  

you see as posed by the current market model and 
where you see the advantages of a market design  

that, in fact, facilitates application of digital 
technologies. And I'll start with the Vietnamese  

Vice Minister. Please, sir, go ahead. By the 
way, dear panel, as always, we are super short  

on time. Our overall window for this panel is 30 
minutes, so I'm going to be asking you to keep  

your remarks truly brief, two to three minutes 
maximum if you would. Please, go ahead Mr. Hoang  

An.
Thank you very much. It is  

my pleasure to attend the Berlin Energy 
Transition Dialogue. In Vietnam, the  

energy market is one of the major tools 
to facilitate the involvement of the  

independent ?? and also the power system. So the 
government of Vietnam have approved a roadmap for  

establishing the ?? by the year 2040. And 
basically in Vietnam like other countries,  

the first is the power market. And the next power 
market by introducing the power market region, we  

end up all ?? to penetrate into the power system. 
And so we provide step by step the choice for the  

customer. Where the eligible customer, they may 
select a supplier and then at the end of the  

journey, we also ?? we treat the customer like 
a household. They might select their supplier as  

well. So this roadmap is very important for 
and in line with the power sector process,  

which has been ??
[ Inaudible ] 

So, in light of that, we also have as a roadmap 
for the energy market, and we are having the  

market for the primary fuel for the national 
economy and also the power sector. So with  

this smart market design, very important tools to 
facilitate the penetration of the ?? to draw the  

investment of this sector into the power sector 
and energy sector. So like in other countries,  

we have in the past an international opportunity 
such as ?? and now we are in the bundling process  

to transition. And distribution ??
[ Inaudible ] 

So together with that, we need a digital system 
and sophisticated IT system for the market clearly  

and also for building. So a smart roadmap 
also helped by the government of Vietnam, and  

we are also moving to the micro route 
and also the management process. 

Thank you.
The development of a  

power system in Vietnam. And we 
see without the sophisticated  

hardware and software, we could not implement the 
successful power market and so together with that,  

we ?? really sophisticated and modern system for 
the system market operator and the ?? and the  

management to ?? one of the successes of Vietnam, 
when we introduce the power market is that we  

reduced the ??
[ Inaudible ] 

From 100% in the past to 46% now. So I 
think in the future, not the private sector  

producers be increases ?? and I think that's 
very consistent policy from Vietnam government. 

Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much. Let me go now to Antonella Battaglini,  

because as I mentioned, you work across 
Europe. So I'd like to see what challenges  

you're seeing when you look at different countries 
and power markets. To what extent are energy grids  

and markets able to absorb growing quantities 
of renewable power and what needs to happen? 

Thank you very much for having 
me and your question. So,  

of course, there are huge differences from one 
region to another. I may refer to Europe, although  

there are similarities also with other developed 
markets. What is important to stress is that  

markets and energy and infrastructure need to be 
developed hand-in-hand. The increasing shares of  

reliable renewable energy sources in the 
system indeed poses some challenges, but also  

offers plenty of opportunities. What 
I would like to stress is that today  

there is a clear need to expand the 
electricity grid at all voltage levels  

because many of the reliable renewables are 
also connected at the low-voltage level,  

but these quantities of renewable energy 
sources have to be transported from one area  

to another area. Generally from where they 
are generated to where they are consumed.  

At the same time, a system which is increasingly 
based on renewables, of course it requires a  

different mechanism, including market mechanism. 
These have to be ?? the markets have to be  

updated and also redesigned to actually leverage 
and enable flexibility. All types of flexibility  

will be needed is needed today and the ?? by 
adding more, flexibility is going to be probably  

the most valuable resource that we have. 
And this should be reflected in the market.  

Additionally, I would like to mention the fact 
that today neither grid infrastructure nor market  

designs are fully representing, yeah, fully 
represented and considering all the potential  

options that can be leveraged by distributed 
resources. We still have some difficulties in  

modelling distributed resources, and this is 
something that has to change very quickly.  

Distributed resources, not only distributed 
generation, but also distributed flexibility  

are important elements not only for keeping 
the system stable to decarbonize quickly, but  

also to increase public acceptance. Where there 
is a very clear demand, especially in Europe,  

but not only, for participation of communities 
and citizens into this energy transition. So,  

the key challenge is that I see is really 
linked to timing. We need to speed up  

the build-up of energy infrastructure. We 
need to plan it in a collaborative way.  

And we need to improve the markets to the world. 
Move products, including flexibility products. 

Thank you very much. Let me take those 
remarks and go straight over to Stefan  

Kapferer. From your perspective as one of the TSOs 
with the largest share of renewable green power,  

what do you see as the challenges and 
the solutions to acquire the kind of  

flexibility that Antonella Battaglini was 
just talking about? She said we're not  

making the most of the opportunities that are 
there. How can digitalization change that? 

I think there are three topics, Melinda. 
The first is to introduce infrastructure  

as efficient as possible. And we all know that 
there are some periods over the year of the grid  

infrastructure where it is not really efficiently 
used, and that digitalization can help us. Dynamic  

line rating where we have a lot of data about the 
temperature, and the temperature is, of course,  

a limiting factor for the grid infrastructure is 
relevant. The second topic is sector coupling. I  

was a little surprised, Melinda, that this word 
was so small written in the word cloud, because  

obviously sector coupling is an extremely relevant 
aspect in the future. Power to heat technologies.  

Power to gas technologies, hydrogen in terms of 
industry. A key role to get between production  

of renewable energy and at the same time demand 
is lower will be immediate. And the last aspect,  

and it was mentioned, of course, by Antonella, 
is the managing of the flexibility. And that  

situation is changing now very fast because in a 
few years, we will have in our control area in the  

eastern part of Germany, millions of electric 
vehicles. We will see millions of heat pumps.  

Storage capacities at home are becoming cheaper 
and cheaper. So what is needed now for managing  

this kind of flexibility in the future is to 
find the right balance between realtime prices,  

which give an incentive to use these cheap 
electricity if it is in the market and to reduce  

consumption if electricity is more expensive. 
And on the other hand, of this balance, we need  

a situation that we still can guarantee 
the stability of the system. Our balancing  

obligations which will be, of course, also 
needed in a decentralized or more decentralized  

extremely complex system in the future.
Thank you very much, Stefan Kapferer. As a big fan  

of sector coupling, let me just say that perhaps 
it got bigger as we went away from the word cloud,  

because, in fact, a lot of the audience was 
still voting. So we'll take another look at that  

perhaps later on. Let me go now to Jo-Jo 
Hubbard. And for you as a pioneering  

start?up in this sector, which market rules 
and structures do you think are most in need  

of change and what are the most promising 
solutions for getting that change? 

Melinda, hi. Thanks very much for having me. So I 
think it goes directly toward what Stefan was just  

saying about moving to realtime price signals 
to granular price signals, but also crucially to  

local price signals. So one of the big winners 
on that word cloud was decentralization  

with an "S" and a "Z," so I think it would 
have been bigger if we all agreed on spelling.  

Put quite simply, today's power markets and price 
signals are too imprecise to incentivize the  

network capacity at a local level. So we've got 
trillions worth of Euros being spent on upgrading  

and extending local networks for all of these new 
assets connecting, and to enable those new kind  

of sector coupling-type business models, and, 
you know, every heat panel, battery, electric  

charging station going in is able to respond 
to quite granular price signals. It's able to  

respond to this near realtime?type markets, so 
that type of flexibility just needs to see those  

pricing signals. And I think we're seeing 
some of this being introduced. We're seeing  

Article 32 requiring local optimization markets. 
As of this year, we're seeing a lot in the UK  

and Australia and now in North America as well, 
North America about resilience. We are absolutely  

going to have to cede to these markets in order 
to optimize probably about 30% of the generation  

and probably the majority of utilization is 
going to be happening at the local level. 

Thank you very much for that. I'd like to do 
a second really short round of questions that  

allows us to take a bit of a deeper dive and get 
even more concrete, but I've also got my eye on  

the clock. We have about ten minutes left, so 
I'm going to ask everybody to be super brief if  

you would with your answers to these questions, 
but let me start again with the Vice Minister,  

Mr. Hoang An, and ask you to talk very concretely 
about what you are doing in Vietnam to get that  

kind of flexibility that everybody on the panel 
has emphasized is so important, especially  

bringing in smaller decentralized producers into 
the grid. So, please, go ahead and, sir, if you  

would, under two minutes in length. Thank you.
Yeah, I have to admit that we have foreseen  

a lot of challenges with the 
penetration of renewable energy.  

And we are still designing measures how we can 
adapt better to the power system. And one of the  

challenges is to ensure this safe operation 
with the power system. In terms of Vietnam,  

we have almost ?? cooperation with the local 
countries, and countries power systems could not  

support Vietnam. That's really different compared 
with the European system. That's the first one.  

And the second one is that in terms of the market, 
how to adopt the new market draw of the renewable  

energy power solution. It is another one of the 
challenges. So, that's really what we need to do. 

Thank you very much. And I will now 
ask the others to also share concrete  

cases and examples, if you would, 
about adapting to ?? for a smart  

market design. And perhaps, first of all, 
to Stefan Kapferer on what you are doing at  

50hertz to really accommodate the green 
power surge and the rise of digitalization.  

I think you're on mute, Stefan. Stefan?
Sorry for that, Melinda. Three very clear  

answers to these questions. And behind me you can 
see our target, 100% covering of an electricity  

demand in our area in 2032. This will only 
work with more flexibility in the system.  

First, we'll check together with local utilities 
in Germany, we organized power to heat for some  

local communities in this area. Second aspect, 
decarbonize means energy in terms of industry  

to very concrete projects with steel industry in 
Hamburg, with chemistry in the middle of Germany.  

Both industries are interested in green hydrogen 
because they are hard to abate electrification.  

So we cooperate to organize and to organize 
electroilizers in these areas. The manufacture  

of heat pumps in Germany and one car manufacturers 
was electric vehicles to look at these millions  

of decentralized capacity of surge in electricity 
in the future. That is something that is a mid  

and long?term perspective, but this will be 
extremely relevant from my perspective as well. 

Thank you very much. And to Antonella Battaglini, 
do you have a case study or two that you could  

share with us where you have seen a very 
effective use of new technologies to get at  

some of the challenges that we're talking about? 
I'm also bearing in mind asking you for these  

case studies that BETD, among other things, 
is all about best practices. So if you have  

a couple of best practices that you could 
cite, that would be very helpful, I think. 

I would like to mention the work that 
we started to do with large consumers.  

Recently engaged with Google in particular 
because of their 24/7 visions. Which is,  

in my point of view, a revolutionary approach. 
Google has moved from their commitment to be  

fully renewable to being 24/7 fully 
decarbonized. This means there is a  

critical opponent attached to that, and what 
we are working on is trying to cluster large  

consumers which share similar objectives and to 
figure out what exactly is needed from the grid  

to help achieve these objectives, but 
also what these large consumers can offer  

to the grid in terms of stability and 
security. We are at the very beginning of this  

process, and there is more work to do 
than what we have done in the past, but  

generally I think this is very much needed.
Thank you very much. And I'll go now to  

Jo-Jo Hubbard again with the request, if you have 
one, for a case study that showcases some of the  

advantages of start?up digital 
technologies in addressing ?? in  

addressing the need for flexibility, 
decentralization, and so on. Thank you. 

Thanks very much. So, I just want to 
give one example, marketplace Electron  

is supporting ?? this is a marketplace with 
farms being constrained off the grid because  

there's not enough network capacity to be 
able to pay to produce less in that period,  

and essentially create space on the networks 
for those wind farms to be taken off ?? so,  

what does that mean? It means everyone wins. 
It means consumers are paid to use power.  

It means more are being built on to the grid. It's 
happening in real time and it's a physical market,  

so it's actually affecting how power flows. It's 
one of very, very few examples of that globally,  

if not one of the only where that is happening. 
I think some of the challenges around that,  

it has to be super granular, it has to 
be real time, it has to be differentiated  

region?to?region. You have to start that 
through national market coordination. 

Thank you very much. Very interesting. Ladies and 
gentlemen, our speakers have been so disciplined  

that we actually have time for one more audience 
question to you. So let me go to our second  

audience question for this panel, and it's this. 
Can you imagine producing power on your own roof  

and selling the excess power with online tools? 
And let me ask the audience to vote now, and maybe  

we're going to have time to get a really quick 
response from our speakers. So, can we ?? can we  

get the question up on screen, dear technicians? 
Second audience question. There we go. 

Okay, we are, of course, at a 
renewables conference, but let's give  

a few more people time to vote. Maybe there 
will still be other votes coming in that don't  

have such a resounding positive ?? okay, 
we have 3% saying no, but I'm gonna give us  

about 20 seconds more, and then I'm just going 
to ask our speakers for their take on this.  

So, a few more no votes as the numbers mount, but 
the overwhelming majority of people answering that  

poll ?? and I realize that we are definitely 
seeing a result of the pool of those who are  

voting and the fact that many people attending 
this conference are very, very interested in the  

green energy transition and renewables, but 
maybe I can just ask all of. Are you seeing  

a change in public sentiment surrounding 
prosumerism? Are you seeing more and more  

willingness among citizens to become decentralized 
producers? Straight down the list of speakers,  

starting with the Vietnamese Vice Minister Hoang 
An. Are you seeing a change in Vietnam, sir? 

Yes, I think we are shifting to prosumer. 
And that's a tendency in Vietnam, now we  

are promoting the rooftop power producer. One of 
the prosumer. I think a decentralized system is  

going to be the future, but we need ?? we have to 
manage the ?? that process so that we can ensure  

the safety approach of the whole system.
Thank you. Antonella Battaglini, are  

you seeing a sea change in public attitudes?
The appetite is very, very big all across Europe,  

but the barriers continue to be quite high, and 
so penetration is still limited. We need to find  

solutions quickly to enable this possibility 
for all consumers. But we should always keep  

in mind that we need to optimize the entire 
system, so that will lead to some limitations. 

Thank you very much. And Stefan 
Kapferer, what are you seeing out there? 

Yeah, obviously, Melinda, as a trend, it's very 
clear, but I think at the moment self-consumption  

is becoming more relevant, and the reason for that 
is taxes, fees and levies are not very attractive  

to sell these renewable energies to other 
places, so this is something we have to work on. 

Thank you. And Jo-Jo Hubbard, over there, 
and in the various markets that you are  

working in, are you seeing 
a major change in attitudes? 

Yes, absolutely. It's no surprise. They can 
generate their own power that they want to  

sell it. I think there are three stages in 
this transition. The first stage is done,  

getting the renewables in the ground. 
Digitalization for optimization. We've  

got to do that first before phase three 
where this really kicks in, differentiators,  

different consumer service leaders.
Thank you very much. Antonella Battaglini,  

I'd like to ask you to very quickly 
wrap things up for us. Can you share  

what you think are the guiding principles for 
power market design and also perhaps some of  

the concrete advantages for digitalization for 
both small and large power producers and users? 

So, let me summarize with maybe three 
points, and I'll start with the market ones.  

We need realtime pricing signals. These 
have to be as granular as possible, because  

only by implementing these price signal with 
a high level of granularity, we can develop  

local solutions which will be an optimized 
way of dealing with growth for renewables.  

Digitalization can definitely help, not 
only to optimize and leverage our resources,  

but also optimize the use of the assets that 
we have in place, and finally sector coupling  

is an important element and will highly contribute 
to the decarbonization process. So with this,  

I think it's a short summary of the conversation.
Indeed, it is, but a very fitting one, so many  

thanks to you, Antonella Battaglini. Many thanks 
to you, Stefan Kapferer from 50hertz. Many thanks  

to the Vice Minister from Vietnam, Mr. Hoang An, 
and also Jo-Jo Hubbard representing the start-up  

perspective on smart market design. I think 
you've all made it very clear that our word  

cloud was pretty accurate in highlighting some 
of the challenges, but also undoubtedly some of  

the opportunities here in this space. So let's go 
back and look at that word cloud one more time,  

if we can. Can we get that back on screen one more 
time to just take a very quick look? Not that one.  

Can we get the other one that we started out with, 
dear technicians? I'm sorry, I'm surprising them  

with this request, but we want to see, among 
other things, whether sector coupling got any  

bigger. I'm not seeing the slide yet, so maybe 
we're gonna have difficulties getting that. Then  

hopefully we will be able, all of us, to see it 
online when our conference has concluded. So,  

many thanks to our speakers for this very, very 
thought-provoking and interesting interaction.


