I would like to get right to our first guest. 
She is the President of the German renewable  

energy federation, the umbrella organization 
of the German renewable sector. Thank you for  

joining me, Dr. Simone Peter. And welcome to 
the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue 2021.
 

Thank you.
Thank you for joining us. I know you know we have  

a few minutes time. Let's get to the questions. 
We have heard strong commitments to achieving  

the objectives of the Paris Agreement and the 
renewable energy growth through 2030 and beyond.  

Has what we've talked about actually going to 
have the necessary dynamics to achieve the goals?
 

Thank you, Jennifer, for your kind introduction. 
Yes, there is a strong momentum for renewables.  

Renewables already employ more than 
11 million people worldwide and there  

will be many more in the years ahead of us.
Renewables are a good solution to take on the  

climate crisis everywhere on our planet. And 
thus, they are resilient. Also, there are crisis,  

like the corona crisis for the international 
agencies. And I am happy to say that a vast  

majority of people in Germany have a renewable 
energy choice. Irrespective of other areas.  

Farmers and small and medium enterprises were and 
still are the main drivers of the transformation  

in Germany. We have a lot of relevant utilities. 
Replacing renewables and phrasing out coal and  

also nuclear. There's a strong market pull on the 
demand side. Private households and businesses  

are shifting their energy consumption towards 
renewable energy. And we see a strongest in the  

renewable in the energy sector, wind and solar 
are the cheapest option for the new capacity.
 

Last year in Germany, we had already 50% of 
renewables in the power mix. And the inclusion of  

the other sectors are the next big challenges. 
And hydrogen, as Commission President  

von der Leyen mentioned, it's hard to 
debate it in the sectors. Thank you.
 

Dr. Peter, this sounds great. But is it 
true we're on track? Are the necessary  

policy frameworks and markets in place? For 
example, in Germany or in the European Union.
 

It is right, but there are shades. The energy 
sector is ready to deliver on a significant  

deployment of renewables in Germany and Europe and 
in many parts of the world. But more stimulation  

is needed, and a fair market design based 
renewable energies is required. In Germany,  

for example, we couldn't sell more than 5 gigawatt 
of new wind capacity and 10 of other capacity per  

year and you can build the capacity. In buildings, 
the biomass and the renewables driven heat pumps  

could cover all heating and cooling needs.
Refurbishment of the building stock could  

significantly increase the share 
of renewables. And    could soon  

out compete highly emitting entire combustion 
engines. But frankly, this will not happen  

automatically. We would like to see more ambitious 
policy decisions to unlock the full potential of  

renewable energy. Actually, I see a strong 
momentum from the European Green Deal. A new  

emission reduction target of minus 55 or better. 
60% by 2030 will definitely be a strong driver  

for faster transformation towards renewable energy 
and energy efficiency. And I'm really looking  

forward to a global race towards renewable energy 
and zero emissions by 2050 at the very latest.  

And I'm sure our friends on the other side of 
the Atlantic are more than ready for this.
 

Thanks so much, Dr. Peter. And 
back to Melinda in the Weltsaal.


