The Agenda 2030 sets out 17 sustainable 
development goals for a transition towards  

less inequalities. Less poverty. And 
more solutions to tackle climate change.  

How are these global goals concretely 
translated into local action? With a  

focus on the energy transition, this session 
will present successful initiatives from  

all over the world that have taken it upon 
themselves to implement these global goals. 

Welcome back to the Weltsaal. And now 
it's time for Global goals, local actions.  

I would like to go ahead and open today 
by taking a look at our Slido question.  

Now, this is a question for 
our audience. In one word,  

what should be the priority to move the 
energy transition forward at the local level?  

As your responses come in, they'll build 
a word cloud here on the monitor next to  

me which will appear, and we will check 
in with them as we move through the day. 

Right now, I am pleased to introduce the members 
of our esteemed panel. Joining us today are the  

Honor Dr. Megan Woods, minister of energy and 
resources in New Zealand, Dr. Seleshi Bekele  

Awulachew, Teresa Ribera Rodriguez from Spain, 
and joined shortly by Angus Taylor from Australia,  

and Dorah Marema, head for sustainability in 
the South African local government association.  

Panelists, thank you so much for joining me. 
Good morning and welcome to day two of the BETD. 

Before we start off with a round of questions for 
you, I would like to quickly check in and see how  

our audience responded to the poll this morning. 
In one word, what should be the movement of the  

energy transition forward at the local level? 
Clear winner so far, renewables. Keep adding your  

voice to the other voices here. Participation, 
this is also another very important word. I would  

like to go back to our panelists now. And I think 
we'll begin with Minister can woods. Minister  

Woods, how do the sustainable development goals, 
SDGs, translate into local action in New Zealand? 

Good morning. It's wonderful to be able to take 
part in this panel and to talk you through the  

progress that New Zealand is making in achieving 
the Sustainable Development Goals. And we are in  

one of the most pressing issues of our time 
globally. Of course, that is climate change.  

New Zealand is reducing all greenhouse 
gases effectively to zero by 2050. And,  

of course, we know that the energy will play an 
important role in the transition for the economy.  

We are accelerating policies to increase renewable 
energy and improve energy efficiency. And these  

policies reflect and drive progress towards the 
sustainable development goals around affordable  

and clean energy, good health and wellbeing, 
decent work and economic growth. Industry,  

innovation and infrastructure, responsible 
production and, of course, climate action. 

New Zealand is the extraordinary position of being 
faced with significant renewable energy options.  

Not only do we have hydro, but we have 
wind and geothermal as well as solar  

in our electricity system. And they're 
determined to get further than around 80%  

of our electricity being produced from renewables. 
We have a goal of 100% renewable electricity grid  

by 2030. To achieve this, we are investigating 
pumped hydro to restore renewable energy when  

it's produced when the wind is blowing or 
the sun is shining so we don't have to rely  

on fossil fuels like gas and coal to make up 
the balance of our electricity requirements. 

This system would be a game changer both in terms 
of energy security and also the decarbonization  

of our wider energy system as we transition away 
from fossil fuels for transport and industrial  

heat. We are making big strides with a new fund to 
help industry adopt energy efficiency measures and  

switch from gas and coal to clean energy such 
as biomass and electricity to process heat.  

Today we are about in the tenth round of funding 
and encouraging lower emission transport which has  

helped to improve the uptake of electric vehicles 
and building a network of charging stations. 

Energy efficiency in homes is targeted 
through our warm up Kiwi homes program,  

offering grants to low income households. And 
there's delivery of new solutions such as solar  

projects on our public housing. Our energy and 
efficiency conservation is helping New Zealand  

businesses plan the transition to lower 
emissions by providing information,  

technical assistance and technology demonstration 
support for businesses. We have a new national  

center which will meet and facilitate lower 
emissions and technology. New Zealand is committed  

to making the transition to a low emissions 
economy, a just transition. One that is fair,  

equitable and inclusive. Working with regions 
and areas to manage the impacts and maximize  

the opportunities of the changes brought about 
by the transition to a low emissions economy. 

Another critical part of the relationship in our 
just transition is the relationship that we have  

for the Indigenous people. A just transition 
means each region is supported to identify the  

economic environment, cultural and social drivers 
for change to deliver the region's long range  

vision. The progress towards the SDGs can also 
be seen through the lens of a just transition  

as they are fundamentally about these same 
venues. Equality and inclusivity. New Zealand's  

commitment to sustainable development goals is 
also a partnership with our Pacific neighbors.  

Where we aim to increase the resilience of energy 
systems across the Pacific. New Zealand has been  

committing to $250 million to increase renewable 
energy and improve energy access in the Pacific.  

New Zealand supports the Pacific renewable energy 
ambitions. The village upgrade and other upgrades  

are examples of work we have conducted in the 
Pacific. These projects reflect goal seven.  

Affordable and clean energy helps the 
safety and resilience of the network.  

Due to the upgrades, there are fewer faults to 
the residents, an almost uninterrupted supply. 

Additionally, free connections have been provided 
to low income households who previously didn't  

have access to electricity. According to the data, 
20% more households were added to the network  

and now have access to electricity. And the energy 
is at the center of the global economy and plays a  

crucial role in the COVID 19 crisis and will 
continue to play a significant role in the  

post COVID economic recovery processes. And 
an investment package focused on the energy  

transition can help stimulate economies and 
create much needed jobs both for the short term  

and beyond. In my view, linking the short term 
recovery to medium and long term strategies based  

on achieving the sustainable development goals 
is the only way forward to ensure that climate  

change targets through a just transition.
I believe that well designed policy measures  

and investments in stimulus recovery 
can drive the wider structural shift.  

Regional transition strategies is a decisive step 
in building resilient economies in societies.  

The energy sector must be viewed as an integral 
part of the economy to fully understand  

the impact of the transition and ensure 
it is timely and just and in accordance  

with the sustainable development goals. It is 
through forums like that this we can move from  

and encourage each other to take action. Thank you 
very much and looking forward to the conversation. 

Thank you very much, Minister 
Woods. Now to Minister Bekela.  

How about Ethiopia? How are they implemented 
in local actions in your country? 

Thank you very much, excellencies. It is indeed 
   I'm going to make a remark on this Energy  

Transition Dialogue. And focusing on the system to 
local. For my country, this is from a developing  

country's perspective. It is a long way to go 
to the energy transition. Which is a crucial  

development input. And development for the 2030 
Sustainable Development Goals agenda. And we are  

looking at importation. Like many African 
countries, only 4.5 gigawatt is exploited so far.  

And the per capita electric consumption is around 
100 kilowatt hour per year. One of the least  

access in Africa for the people with electricity. 
The clean cooking access is not more than 12%. 

For the national energy consumption, it's from the 
resources which has    for our social and economic  

development despite the country's 
social and economic progress in the  

last decades. And we are among the 20 poorest 
countries in the world. In this event,  

my country has embarked on an ambitious work to 
achieve access for all in the spirit of this.  

Our national program which was allowed in 2017 has 
been in the electricity access 100% by 2025 where  

75% of our population will be connected through 
off grid technology. Our national electrification  

program is delivering three important goals.
Efficiency, integrity in access delivery,  

maximizing the electrification program, 
and calling for more adjustments to the  

electricity access. And having the principles and 
supporting the social goals and human development.  

The access to electricity has rightly be 
part of the sustainable development goals.  

And it's impacted women and 
children by replacing cooking fuels.  

Part of the productive industries. And modernizing 
their culture. And creating jobs for employment. 

The Minister   and accounts for CO2 emissions. 
We are looking at the impact of climate change.  

For the climate change, our country is a front 
runner in initiating the climate resilience  

green economic strategy. Which is the foundation 
of the first nationally contributed contribution.  

And we are, of course, in this regard, with our 
prime minister, it's a huge program. Which is  

mitigation and carbon sequestration which is 
planting half a billion trees a year. At the  

moment, we have planted so far 2 billion. And this 
year, we are going to plant 6 billion additional.  

We are making progress in that regard and 
we are conducting financial help with the  

organizations. The government is working with the 
public and private and government partner support. 

On this equation, I would say that 
it is time for African countries  

to pool their resources and enhance cooperation 
and improve international competitiveness by  

making energy services available at a competitive 
price. Accessibility is a concern of Africa  

and making the connection. When it costs more 
than the original connection. And it's reliable  

and affordable clean energy, it's a driving 
force for industrialization and regional work  

in Africa. And that's working with the United 
Nations in the agenda for Africa. And this is  

a very good opportunity for African countries 
to discuss success stories. When to harness the  

technology and business models to be replicated.
Finally, I would like to congratulate the Federal  

Republic of Germany and the embassy for organizing 
this very important event. Thank you very much. 

Thank you very much, Minister. And welcoming 
Minister Taylor. Thank you for joining us.  

Get to you in just a moment. 
But first, my next conviction  

to Minister Ribera. What are initiatives that 
successfully implement the energy transition.  

Minister Ribera, I'm having a 
little bit of an issue    yes. 

I didn't realize. I was just saying good morning 
in Europe and Africa. And good afternoon/evening  

in New Zealand and Australia. This is great 
to join this panel. Thank you very much. 

I would like to share some ideas, some messages 
on your question. The first of them being that  

we are convinced that this is a very important 
challenge and task we have on our shoulders. And  

local communities are very, very important players 
to succeed in our goal of transforming the energy  

system. We have some history and background 
which is interesting in local communities and  

through associations that use electricity to the 
numbers. That has traditionally been around water.  

But now these have changed, and this has happened 
for centuries. And now it's new sources of revenue  

and energy on the people and the implications 
and so forth. How much, how far local communities  

can go in efficiency in the use of energy. And 
planning in a manner that's an intelligent use  

of the energy including mobility part. And 
so, I think that's the political capacity of  

local communities and an application of this 
agenda by the societies that is important. 

The second lesson is that I think there's a great 
need for innovation no matter where we live. And  

the initiatives around the local players have 
been used and    use and consumption of energy  

is quite interesting. So, what we are expecting to 
see, because we are already having some examples,  

but we can generalize, is to see the new 
business models and new technology solutions,  

new innovation partners that can provide some 
lessons to be built and to accelerate this new  

transition in the time to come.
This is why we see that we  

should help facilitate this transformation. 
We have seen the global energy communities  

and the local communities in the energy field in 
the long term plan and the long term strategy,  

but also through the regulation. Local communities 
have very important ways to provide to this  

system. We are talking about SDGs, and I think 
it's very basic to see how this relates to SDG  

one, and empower women, SDG five, and power for 
all, SDG7, and then working through this space,  

SDG 8, and applying to the energy consumption, 
SDG 9. And in addition, working in a smarter way  

in the production and consumption of    not to 
talk about human settlements or planet goals. 

So, I think our partnerships are important. 
So, I think that the goal of local communities  

is here. There are some signs that we are trying 
to stress. As I said in the developing context.  

I would like to bring out two of them. One 
of them, local communities. They are the key  

stakeholders in the transformation of the energy 
system and talking about dispensation. And it's  

something that we are off of, this impact of the 
energy transformation for the local communities  

and the workers that used to have a very strong 
dependence on coal and fossil fuels production and  

different uses. So, how we scale workers and have 
the provision for employment and the economic  

perspective in these territories.
And I think it doesn't work unless  

the local communities are pretty involved in 
this transformation. So, with the application,  

what they want to be. And to show that people 
accept the bids and the opportunities. And the  

second comment for regulation of the local 
energy community. So, we know there are  

these possibilities through the distributed energy 
systems. How it is produced in a smaller scale  

and how this can connect and have access to the 
surplus they can use when they have surplus.  

And how the technical issues really are solved in 
a very easy manner. And there we have got the good  

response from local communities. They are willing 
to go on to invest and to provide their share in  

the energy transformation in order to fulfill the 
100% energy system we want in the years to come. 

So, I think there are many way    
possible experiences. And I would say  

much appetite to have their share, to 
play their role and to show to what extent  

all this imagine, capacity and willingness 
can help into these collective endeavors. 

Thank you very much. We hear a lot about 
local action and local communities.  

And I would like to, again, welcome you 
Minister Taylor and ask you a question.  

We're eager to hear from you how SDGs are 
reflected in local actions in Australia. 

Thank you very much, Jennifer. I'm pleased to 
join you to share Australia's work on what we  

consider to be one of the great global challenges 
of our time. Which is how to bring our emissions  

globally down to net zero and across the globe 
as soon as possible. While at the same time  

growing economies, growing jobs, creating local 
opportunity and prosperity with affordable,  

reliable energy. Now, we're doing this with a 
very strong focus on research and development  

and supporting deployment of new and emerging 
energy technologies. And just last year,  

I launched Australia's Technology Investment 
Roadmap. It's got about $18 billion of government  

investment in low emissions technologies 
over the next 10 years. Alongside that, we're  

expecting about an additional $50 billion of 
private sector financing. Current investment  

in Australia by 2030. But a roadmap sets very 
clear economic targets for five priority areas.  

And they are hydrogen, long duration storage. 
The production of renewables. A low carbon steel  

and aluminum, and technologies for lower carbon.
And the targets for each are very specific  

and sit at parity with existing alternatives. 
Hydrogen, for example, set a target to get below  

$2 Australian dollars for kilogram, there's 
about $1.60 US. In cars with gas. This is part  

of the record of innovation we have had in the 
country. And that includes having the world's  

most successful green bank, called the Clean 
Energy Finance Corporation. And we have one  

of the most rigorous justify set schemes, the 
fund that's had 80 million tons of abatement.  

And we have the most solar in the world and 
the most wind and solar combined of any country  

outside of Europe. Our approach will make sure we 
meet our 2030 agreement under the Paris Agreement. 

And we have a trusted supply to many countries 
across the Asia Pacific region. If we can realize  

our hydrogen ambition, we can continue to supply 
those partners with cheap, clean energy to support  

their growth and their efforts to decarbonize 
alongside that growth. And getting this  

means that countries don't have to choose between 
growth and decarbonization. Between opportunity  

and lower emissions. And having 
that tradeoff we think is the key  

to ensure at the local level we're able to 
support prosperity in our communities. The  

five technologies are prioritized under the 
roadmap have the potential to substantially  

reduce or eliminate emissions in sectors that 
are responsible for 90% of the world's emissions.  

Which are about 45 billion tons annually.
So, getting those technologies to parity  

on net zero is practically achievable. Not just 
for high income countries. But this is crucially  

important for developing nations as well. It 
will enable industrial scale decarbonization  

that is required for sustainable development and 
all that goes with that, of course. But Australia  

recognizes that we won't be able to make these 
technologies globally scalable and commercially  

viable on our own. The race to develop effective 
vaccines against coronavirus shows what can be  

achieved when the world works together towards a 
common goal. We need to bring that same laser like  

focus and collaborative effort to accelerating 
the development of practical technology pathways. 

We're already collaborate with our 
trading and strategic partners, Germany,  

Singapore, the UK and the US. And this year ahead 
of COP26, we want to ramp up that collaboration.  

We welcome ambition. But practical action and 
achievement at the local level on the ground  

is what actually matters. And Australia is 
supporting global efforts to reduce emissions  

as we cover from the global pandemic. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Minister Taylor. And to  

wrap up our introduction statements, Dorah Marema. 
Now, from your perspective at the municipal level,  

what is the one key message you would like to 
share in terms of local implementation of SDGs? 

Thank you so much and thanks for this 
opportunity to participate in this panel.  

In terms of what would happen at the local 
level, it is important to make sure that  

we are aware that translating SDGs to a local 
level involves a lot of communication, a lot of  

stakeholders. And that, you know, but we are aware 
that the local government level, it comprises of a  

lot of actors as well. And actually, the form of 
government that is closest to the people. There  

are a lot of challenges that the communities deal 
with. And also presents itself as a    as a sea  

of government with a lot of opportunity for making 
sure that SDGs are actually translated into local  

actions. And I think it's important to also note 
that live in the local communities is ongoing. 

It's not broken into different parts. And as a 
result, the interventions that have been made  

need to be speaking to this continuity or to this 
way of life within their local communities that  

local government has to deal with. But often are 
struggling with issues of poverty, unemployment.  

You know, low economic growth. And as a 
result, we need to be able to map the SDGs  

from the top. Take one say, for example, 
SDG number 14. And use that to connect  

to that    to create a pathway and connect 
to the other SDGs and find a way in which  

they can be implemented at the local level without 
having to single out each one of them. To connect  

to the people's daily struggles and to meeting 
their daily needs of service delivery access  

to clean water. Access to energy. Access to food 
and education and all of that packaged together as  

things that are not subdivided into smaller parts.
So, I think it's important to make sure that     

also, there has to be a lot of awareness raising 
at a local level to ensure that municipalities,  

that the local government is aware of the 
SDG agenda. And being able to locate itself  

within that. And identify the SDGs that are 
particularly relevant to local government and  

   and partner with others to be able to connect 
up with those. There has been a lot of initiatives  

in South Africa, for example, with the assistance 
   assistance of others that worked with a number  

of municipalities that have done extremely 
well to work with the SDGs in South Africa.  

For example, they really internalized. The SDGs 
and has set itself up as almost like a champion  

where even the initialization of the SDGs 
where they're reporting, you know, would follow  

the SDGs and indicate which SDG has been 
addressed in the course that they are producing  

in various projects that they are working on.
And I think it's important at this level of  

community that the officials are trained and 
are resourced to be able to translate this  

to their immediate communities that they 
work with at the local level. Thank you. 

Thank you very much, Dorah Marema, before 
the audience questions, I would like to check  

Slido and see what you have been saying at home. 
In one word, what's to bring the energy transition  

forward at the local level? Interesting 
topics on hydrogen, and power consumption.  

With my panelists, with those results in mind, I 
would like to go to our first audience question.  

I would like to ask Dorah Marema to respond first 
to that. What was the greatest surprise for you  

when implementing national and local measures to 
bring forward the energy transition? Dorah Marema? 

I think one of the greatest surprises is 
that even though, you know, moving to a new  

development and moving to such a desirable 
action, I came to realize that we think the  

local spheres in the country that one has to 
consider the people who are the center of this. 

Yes. And the issues are crucial. It's what we 
are working towards. But what about the workers  

who have been scared to work in 
this whole energy generation?  

What about the families? What about the women who 
have set up a small enterprise around this    this  

energy generation? Are we taking them 
along with us? Do they understand the part  

that you need to be taking to make sure that 
they are not being left behind? Are question  

considering the issue of re scaling the 
workers who have been for many decades  

compared to work in this environment which we are 
now moving away from? For me, a just transition  

when implemented at the local level, it's 
important that you pay attention to the  

dynamics within    within the local community. And 
I think it cannot be a one size fits all. It needs  

to be able to pay attention. What are the dynamics 
within this community? And how can we keep moving  

these communities away from this coal energy 
generation economy into a more cleaner one? 

How do we re scale them? How do we use that as an 
opportunity to educate and to raise awareness in  

such a way that the many millions who still 
don't have access to electricity can now  

embrace or even start requesting energy generated 
from cleaner forms? That it actually comes from  

them that they understand that if we do not 
take this path, we will end up with a    with a  

warming climate which will result in a lot of 
sanctions that will in turn affect them. That  

they will be the ones that will be worse effected. 
We need them to be able to partner with us  

at a local level to be able to start moving away 
from the energy economy into a more cleaner one. 

Thank you very much, Dorah Marema. With some 
important questions we need to be asking.  

I would like to address the same question, though, 
to Dr. Woods. What was the greatest surprise  

for you when implementing national and local 
measures to bring forward the energy transition? 

There are some observations, actually. What a 
central organizing force in terms of the economic  

future of the region that the energy transition 
offers if we do the transition properly. And  

like the previous speaker, talking about the 
need to appreciate the need for re skilling.  

The need for planning around the industries 
that come next to make sure that local people  

are going to be benefiting from what comes next. 
One of the things that we found very much in the  

era that we have and done intensive work around 
the transition and not just in New Zealand, but  

traditionally with the oil and gas production 
region. And New Zealand made the decision in  

2019 to end the exploration for oil and gas. It's 
just how well the community has embraced this. 

But they're really looking toward to a future. 
And grasp what the opportunities might be there.  

But as one of the things that we have done a lot 
of information around the just transition and what  

it would look like. But the need to absolutely 
localize this for the specific area. So, in my  

introductory comments, the need for us to 
approach this in a bi cultural way with  

our Indigenous people in New Zealand. Both as 
commercial partners, but at a community level  

has been integral to the success in New 
Zealand. And I think we have to accept,  

and with the previous speaker, there is no 
one size fits all when it comes to this.  

We have to understand the hyper localism 
that sits at the core of what we need to do. 

Hyper localism is an important world. And talking 
about a few successful measures so far. We have  

another audience question that actually asks, 
what are some of the locally implemented actions?  

I would like to direct that to Dr. Seleshi 
Bekele Awulachew. Would you care to comment?  

I'm afraid that Dr. Bekele's connection has 
disappeared for a bit. So, I'll address same  

question to Minister Taylor. Can you talk about 
some of the characteristics of success actions? 

Yeah. It's a good question. And the previous 
question was a very good one. I will say,  

that, yeah, the most striking thing for me and 
this is to stay on what we see in successful  

local actions, as well as unsuccessful ones, is a 
recognition that energy systems are very complex.  

And it's very easy to have unintended 
consequences. And in particular,  

it's just so crucial to maintain a focus on 
affordable, reliable energy for households,  

for small businesses and for industry. For 
manufacturing industries, for instance, that rely  

on that affordable, reliable energy. I think we 
did best when we keep an eye on making sure that  

access to energy, which has been a hallmark of 
successful prosperity and development in countries  

across the world over a long period of 
time now. If we take that focus on that  

accessible, affordable, reliable energy as 
we're making changes in the technologies,  

then I think we get really good local outcomes.
If we lose sight of that,  

we risk loss of jobs and loss of opportunity at 
that very local level. And we have seen some very  

strong local action. We are at the highest 
level of household solar. Solar on rooftops  

in Australia. That's been very, very successful. 
Our challenge is always to make sure that that's  

delivering the affordable reliable energy for 
everybody, for industry, for small businesses  

at the same time that maintains those 
opportunities down at the local level. 

Thank you very much. And I'm happy you're 
back with us, Dr. Bekele, the same question  

to you. Can you give us a few characteristics 
of successfully implemented measurements so far?  

Then I'll go to Dr.    to Teresa 
Ribera, can you answer the question  

about successfully implemented procedures so far? 

I think that 

I heard you. What did you say?
We were talking about   just one moment, please.  

Talking about the the successful measures, so, 
successfully implemented local actions. Can you  

talk me through a couple of characteristics of 
those? Successfully implemented local actions.  

I'm afraid that there's a bit 
of a delay in our communication,  

Dr. Bekele. I'll go ahead and 
come to you, Teresa Ribera. 

I think that the most 
successful thing has been the    

Go ahead and go, Ms. Ribera. 

Okay. Thank you. I wanted to hear Mr. 
Bekele. But we will have a chance later on.  

A short comment. I think that the most 
impressive thing is the appetite coming  

from local communities on how people organize 
themselves. So, the successful experience goes  

around this notion of cooperative associations 
and continue through rooftops, and also  

in the smallest plans. Which is quite interesting. 
How they can combine different alternatives. So,  

biomass, solar. There is    or geothermal.
I think that the most interesting thing is  

the kind of innovation and business that they 
are providing. And then    and the willingness  

to develop a new skill, a new capacity so to    
to provide this mileage and other capacities in  

other places. I think that the most successful 
thing is being identified for the time being. 

Thank you very much, Ms. Ribera. One more 
time back to Dr. Bekele. I think we have a  

little bit of a delay. Can you hear me, Dr. 
Bekele? Can you hear me and are you there?  

I think there might be a significant 
delay. But I know that we would be  

able to check in with Dr. Bekele on social 
media. And his statement will be available  

under the #betd21 at the @greensofa_BETD 
handle. And this brings our panel to a close.  

Thank you so much if my panelists for joining 
me this morning, this afternoon or this evening.


