Hello Mr. Ijspeert and welcome. Thank 
you so much for being here today with us. 

Thank you for having me.
I have a question that I would like to address  

to you. I would like to start first by asking if 
you have any reactions to the panel discussion we  

just heard and more generally a little bit 
about your thoughts on the Energiewende.
 

I didn't hear  

your question. I think the connection is solid 
Let me ask that again. If you had any reactions  

to the panel we just heard and any 
reactions to the Energiewende. 
 

As a company, we are active in Africa training 
our local partners to develop the capacity they  

need. Other issues were addressed. In particular, 
we speak about energy transition worldwide,  

around 2 billion people around electricity. 
That also decentralized renewable energy,  

and we have been active for many years, the 
last 20 years we have been in this field. And  

it's only possible if those projects are supported 
by The World Bank. The African Development Bank,  

which is also improving the social 
welfare in those countries 
 

You just mentioned about being in the renewable 
business for 20 years, but BAE Batteries stretches  

back about 120 years ago. That has seen so 
much. We saw the beginning of electrification,  

the beginning of the fossil fuel age and now we're 
seeing renewable energy. Can you tell us what you  

see as the challenges of the energy transition?
Sorry. Can you repeat the last question again?
 

Of course. What do you see as the major 
challenges of the energy transition?
 

The main challenge to find the right education, 
the right technical solution. If we look back,  

for example, has been developed 30 years 
and is still in a certain development stage.  

If question look at the actual developments, in 
particular also in Germany, we see that hydrogen  

is in particular moving forward, and 
it looks like actually, for example,  

hydrogen or some years ago biomass is the 
source of energy for the energy transition.  

But every technology has its application and I 
think the future is to find the right mix between  

the technologies. The energy will be stored 
where it is consumed. Not only in Africa where  

we speak about decentralized renewable energy. 
See also developments in Germany. Even fossil  

power plants that they store the energy in 
batteries to supply the energy to the moment  

when it's needed and also in batteries. 
So, batteries are an essential element  

for the energy transition in the future 
not only in Germany, but worldwide. And  

what we very often forget is to look at the 
cost of the storage, and some technologies are  

in the development stage, and if we look at the 
kilowatt cost, if you compare them with fossil  

fuel cost, they are still extremely high, so that 
means that there is a need for improvement in  

technologies in such a way, technologies becomes 
competitive compared to fossil energy. And also  

to have the possibility to 
store the energy decentralized.  

And in particular also in Germany, part of the 
discussion could be we need 7,000 kilometers more  

storage. That's the biggest challenge. Also 
when you look at the lobbying of different  

organizations, you sometimes see that there 
is no real interest from certain institutions  

to develop also the field of renewable energy. 
Thank you so much, Mr. IJspeert. You're  

saying energy is stored where it is 
consumed and we need more discussion.


