Solar Impulse was built to send a message. 
Clean and efficient solutions exist.  

The ground breaking technologies that allowed the 
plane to fly proved it. It's now time to bring  

these innovations to the ground and scale them 
for the benefit of the people and the planet. When  

replacing old, polluting devices with efficient, 
existing solutions can drastically reduce the  

world's energy consumption and therefore 
CO2 emissions while opening up new market  

opportunities, creating jobs and profit. This 
has always been the vision of Bertrand Piccard,  

the man behind solar impulse, he advocated that 
economy and ecology had to go hand in hand.  

His next great challenge with the Solar Impulse 
Foundation to select 1,000 solutions that  

impact the environment while enabling economic 
development and bring them to decision makers. 

To achieve this challenge, the Solar Impulse 
Foundation brought together innovators,  

investors and solution seekers to 
have clean technologies in order to  

showcase solutions that have the potential 
to address today's environmental challenges.  

These solutions will be awarded by independent 
experts with the Solar Impulse label if they meet  

the following criteria. Technological feasibility, 
environmental and social and economic development,  

profitability. the Solar Impulse label covers a 
wide variety of fields in sustainable development  

goals, SDGs, products and services, prototypes to 
fully commercialized solutions. This label aims  

at raising awareness about available clean 
solutions to facilitate their presentation.  

Bertrand Piccard will travel the world 
with one goal: Motivate governments,  

corporations and institutions to adopt clean 
and efficient solutions. Encourage them to go  

beyond compromise and adopt more ambitious 
environmental targets and energy policies.  

Bertrand will promote the solutions to the 
media and the public to make them accessible  

to a broad audience. We need politicians to own 
the solution so that they know which ones are best  

suited for their country. Understand that they are 
profitable. Can create jobs and then incorporate  

them into their environmental and energy policies.
Profitable solutions to protect the environment  

exist. Join our challenge to 
build a sustainable future.
 

Ladies and gentlemen, that was a video 
introduction from Bertrand Piccard  

who is a psychiatrist and explorer. He made 
history by accomplishing two aeronautical firsts,  

flew around the world nonstop in an air balloon. 
And more recently, flew around the world nonstop  

in a solar  powered plane without 
fuel. As you heard in the video, he has  

a goal to identify 1,000 profitable solutions to 
protect the environment and support clean growth.  

I am very pleased to introduce our guest, Bertrand 
Piccard. Ladies and gentlemen, welcome. Hello. 

Thank you very much. Excellencies, ladies 
and gentlemen, good morning. This video  

allows me to take the link between 
my speech in 2017, four years ago,  

to this same Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue and 
today. Because four years ago, I made a promise.  

I made the promise to bring 1,000 solutions 
that would be technologies, systems, products,  

devices, materials, that would be financially 
profitable to protect the environment. 

But a promise without follow up has no sense. No 
value. So, today is the follow up. What happened  

in these four years? Well, in the beginning a 
lot of people told me it's impossible to bring a  

thousand solutions. Then they started to calculate 
and the maximum you can find is about 300.  

Well, what did we do? We put 
in place a pool of 400 experts.  

We managed to have 16 partners from different 
projects. We had the members of the World Alliance  

for Efficient Solutions that we had created 
starting to bring solutions, submit solutions  

and we get the certification of 
the process, we changed the labels. 

Today we have 950. 950 solutions. 
So, in Paul, we reach a thousand.  

It's a significant number. But, of course, we will 
continue to get more and more of these solutions.  

Why is it so important? We have heard this today, 
bringing a lot of economical arguments about the  

energy transition. She has spoken about the need 
to create more energy independence in Europe. We  

have seen that fighting climate change becomes an 
industrial opportunity. That is bringing a lot of  

competitive advantages. But even more, protection 
of the environment becomes a competitive field  

because the opportunities lie precisely here.
This we know, we hear it. And we have  

governments who are setting goals of carbon 
neutrality by 2050. But how are they going  

to reach it? Sometimes it seems like it's a big 
declaration allowing to give it to the next one  

to have him doing the job. Well, what we need 
today is to understand that the solutions exist.  

And in every media debate, in every political 
decision, in every international negotiation,  

the fact that the thousand solutions exist is 
an essential part of building a better future. 

We cannot deny the fact that we have to change. 
But how do we change? And it's really important,  

I really emphasize that. Just identifying 
problems and looking for solutions is not enough.  

We have to look in the market, on the 
innovation, everything that exists today.  

And that allows us to change each time we want 
to become more efficient. I like to say it's  

the theory of the piranha. If you have one 
piranha, those little fishes that bite you,  

it hardly makes a harm. But if a thousand comes, 
they have eaten you completely and there's only  

this left. And the solutions of today, the 
clean technologies, all the ways to produce,  

to store, to save, to distribute, to consume 
renewable energies, it's exactly the same. 

We can put all the solutions in place in 
order to use energy consumption, in order  

to be more efficient, in order to produce more 
resources. But the regulations are not allowing us  

to do that. The regulations today 
are still based on old technologies.  

Which means that you have a lot of corporate, a 
lot of private people, a lot of them who would say  

why we are emitting a lot. With CO2, 
it's legal. I'm allowed to do it. So,  

it's clear that today what we need is to raise the 
bar, raise a challenge. Be much more ambitious in  

the energy policy and the environmental targets. 
And we can do that because the solutions exist.  

And if we do it, if we have countries that 
are taking seriously the regulation part,  

it will pull to the market all of these 
hundreds and hundreds of solutions that  

sometimes belong to big corporations. But 
very often belong to small startups or unknown  

and who need clients, who need promotion in order 
to become the successful companies of the future. 

So, we see in which direction we have to 
go. We see that we have the tools to do it.  

And as you've heard, I want to go around the 
world again. A third journey around the world  

to bring these solutions to heads of states. And 
to write them the tool. A tool where they can  

ask all the questions and get all the answers 
given by the latest technology that exists today.  

Not vague ideas for the future, but technologies 
that exist today. And for this, we need to take  

together with us all the big corporations. 
Especially the one who are polluting the most.  

Because    and this is a new narrative also    
this starts to diversify. Even oil companies  

today start to observe in which direction they 
have to go. And if there is a carbon tax on the  

border as we heard yesterday, which is a fantastic 
solution for Europe, of course, we need to create  

inside Europe all the skills, all the potentials 
in order to use what we have to do better. 

So, in terms of regulation, there are not only 
things to prevent, there are things to allow.  

We know that today in a lot of the countries 
of Europe, it is prohibited to discharge your  

electric car on the grid to give electricity 
to your house during a peak of consumption.  

This is something that we have to allow. 
Regulation is also about allowing. One of  

the solutions that has been labeled by the Solar 
Impulse Foundation is when you are in a car,  

use the 20% fuel consumption and 80% the toxic 
particles that are emitted. If you do that on  

your car, you have to re certify your car. Do a 
new certification. Nobody is going to do that.  

The regulation is that allowing people to modify 
their energy to be more environmentally friendly. 

So, our label is the only label today that proves 
the profitability of environmental products  

and processes and technologies. And we want 
everyone to be able to benefit from it. It's a  

not for profit project. And I'm going to show you 
one of these projects. One of these solutions.  

Which is a company specialized in drilling for 
oil. And they made a diversification to drill  

for geothermal. So, I would like to include in 
the screen Cindy Demichel, the CEO of Celsius.  

What you do is absolutely fantastic because 
it's the example that an oil exploration company  

can bring its contribution to the energy 
transition. Can you tell us more about it? 

Yeah, absolutely. The observation 
is, you know, 25% of the global  

emissions are actually coming from heating 
   from heating and cooling buildings. And  

basically, that's the use. And the good 
news we have at Celsius Energy is that 90%  

   90% of those emissions can be reduced if just 
your accessing    just below your building you  

have a source there. And what we are doing 
is connecting the buildings to the Earth  

using the expertise and the know how so that 
you'll be able to access this resource and heat  

your buildings while reducing by 90% the CO2 
emissions. So, this is what we're doing, right. 

It's a fantastic project. And probably 
what everybody would like to know.  

Is it going to remain a nearby? Or be a 
big part of the activity? And in how many  

years can it be truly significant for the profit?
Absolutely. So, this is a very good question. And  

actually, you know, having a good technology is 
not enough. You need to have support. And we have  

the support. Your support financially and we want 
to scale up and have a massive impact. And we are  

very serious about it. It has a few ventures 
of which Celsius Energy. And in 5, 10 years,  

the energy will be a big part    a significant 
part of the revenue. So, diverting our expertise,  

diverting our know how is definitely something 
we want to make it accessible to everyone energy  

that we need and alternate energy as well.
And last question before we have to stop.  

There are governments listening to us. There are 
regulators. There are specialists. Politicians.  

What do you expect from them to have 
the development of a project like yours? 

So, you know, as I said, a good technology is not 
enough. Financial support is one. But regulation  

support is another one. And one I heard yesterday 
talking about the feat for 55 legislation that the  

European Union is putting together this summer. 
This is where we need homogeneity and, you know,  

to push people building to embark on this wave of 
building renovation that was mentioned yesterday.  

And to prove them to get rid of the fossil fuels 
and to allow maybe incentive. But also, to get  

this carbon border mechanism and so on that will 
help this solution to emerge. And this ambition  

by the European Union to reach the 55 reduction 
of the global emissions by 2030. And there's the  

recognition that we need to make this resource 
accessible for any country, for any building,  

existing, new buildings in our cities and to make 
really a difference and to have a global impact. 

Imagine a world where there's 25% of 
emissions become 2.5% of emission. Because  

you can access this resource. Because you 
can access to this reducing of emissions.  

That is our mission and that is to be supported by 
financial support and regulation support as well. 

Exactly. So, we see that there was hope 
a few years ago. There is reality today.  

But to make this reality overall, 
we need the regulations that will  

help it, that will support it. And the 
people who are listening to us today,  

they are the pioneers that need to take these 
decisions, need to take the responsibility of  

allowing these new technologies to come much 
more on the market. So, thank you, Cindy. 

Thank you.
Have a great day. And all the best. 

Thank you so very much, Bertrand Piccard 
and Cindy Demichel. What a wonderful way  

to start out this second day of the 
Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.


