The world of transportation is undoubtedly in 
the midst of disruption as it faces increasing  

challenges on multiple fronts. Today's transport 
and energy challenges require a holistic approach.  

Better urban planning. Reduction and 
optimization of our mobility needs.  

Digitalization. New business models. Shared 
economy. Behavioral changes and electrification. 

As you know, ladies and gentlemen, disruptive 
technologies are transforming mobility. But the  

seconder absolutely still needs to move faster to 
reduce its carbon footprint. And because of the  

inter linkage with energy, it will take a joined 
up holistic approach to do so. How did we build  

comprehensive, systemic solutions that 
deliver better, cleaner and more socially just  

transport for all? That is our key question 
in this session. And in just a minute,  

I want to introduce our esteemed panelists. 
But first, I want to ask all of those who  

are registered users to please vote    or to 
please weigh in on our audience question for  

this session. And that question is: In 
your opinion, should the polluter pays,  

and user pays principles be implemented without 
delay in all modes of transport? And I see that  

some of you are already voting. But let's get more 
votes on this as well. Should the polluter pays,  

and user pays principle be implemented without 
delay in all modes of transport. Please vote  

yes or no. And we'll take a look at 
the results in just a few moments. 

But it is my pleasure now to introduce our 
esteemed guests. And I welcome Meike Jipp,  

the director of transport research at the German 
aerospace center. Currently on leave from her  

professorship on demand and transport impacts on 
the Technical University of Berlin. We can to you.  

And pleased to be joined by Corina Apachite, head 
of artificial intelligence and big data solutions  

at Big Continental Automotive. I hope I pronounced 
your last name correctly, Corina. If not, please  

correct me. And lastly, Joanne Kubba, based in 
the Netherlands for Uber with responsibility for  

Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
And dear ladies, and once again,  

we have an all female session which is    which 
is always exciting. Let me first go back to an  

audience poll to take one quick look at where the 
results stand before I come to you. And in fact,  

by far and away most of our registered users 
did vote yes. That both the polluter pays,  

and user pays principles should be 
implemented without delay. Just 8% saying no. 

So, and by the way, ladies and gentlemen, I 
am very much hoping that you can also send us  

your audience questions. We had a little bit of a 
problem with the technology for audience questions  

earlier on. I'm hoping we fixed it. So, dear 
audience members, please do send us questions  

and we will try to bring them on in a little 
bit later on. And back to the title of this  

section and ask each of you to tell us about what 
you and your organization are currently doing  

to deliver better, cleaner and fairer transport 
for all. And how you see the key priorities for  

doing that. And as always, I'm going to ask you 
to please keep your remarks brief because we have  

a very limited window of time for this session.
So, I'm talking about responses of under 3 minutes  

if you would, please. And 
I'll begin with Meike Jip. 

Thank you very much for the invitation. And for 
a chance to have the discussion with you here in  

this conference. From my perspective, the most 
crucial answer to your question is the holistic  

approach that you already mentioned in the have 
that you presented. And that actually is what we  

are concerned with at our Institute. So, we are 
analyzing the solutions that we have attained.  

And we look at the effects of these solutions in 
a pretty broad picture. We analyze the humans,  

and who wants to use that technology. We 
check whether the infrastructure fits to  

these solutions. Whether the business models fit, 
whether they exist. And we also look into the  

rebound effects. After we see positive effects 
of solutions, but only in a very limited way. 

And they also cause rebound effects 
which are negative in the long run.  

So, we are trying to do with our research, 
identify these holistic effects. And then,  

of course, also provide solutions to them. For 
example, when we look into the automated tracks  

which can drive in the windshield of other tracks. 
They have, of course, the idea of saving energy.  

But if they actually were more cost efficient, 
it also increases the number of tracks  

that are driven that way. And that's 
exactly one of these rebound effects. 

So, we can actually implement climate neutrality 
for all, but we have to implement our solutions in  

a systemic way and think of all the effects 
and implement a whole package of solutions.  

And then we will manage that transformation.
Thank you very much. And let me go over to Corina  

Apachite now. And would you please correct 
my pronunciation if necessary and tell us  

what Continental is doing in this 
area. And also, what you're doing  

in your particular area of AI and big data.
Yep, sure. Thank you very much. Thank you for  

being today. My name is Corina Apachite, it's the 
pronunciation. But since I'm doing all the big  

mistakes in Germany and English pronunciation, 
it's fine. But the mobility means that it's  

an important component of our future mobility. 
And specialists around the world are working  

on the further development of existing concepts 
and new solutions for climate, and hybrid.  

In order to create safe, efficient and 
compatibility mobility, we need to combine  

competencies towards energy optimization and 
drive management, safety, information management. 

I do believe that data in that    
is my area of responsibilities will  

contribute to both intelligent and sustainable 
transportation as well. How can we do that?  

The data, if put together, maybe can help 
an unprecedented holistic mobility. To  

treat this from the perspectives and consider all 
dependencies and cause effects. Automatically the  

ministry has a very complex supply chain. And 
there is only one part of the mobility we are  

envisioning for the future.
Very often we try to optimize parts of  

our system, some others will be disadvantaged. 
New technologies like artificial intelligence  

contributed already to a predicted and optimized 
mobility solutions. Imagine that you could predict  

how many people are willing to move from A to B at 
any time. And we have the bus of exactly that size  

to pick them up at the location. We reduce the 
emissions, and we are making the products the size  

to accomplish the task. There is the oversized 
solution, but we can meet the customer needs.  

And we are facing challenges. But we are getting 
some    at hand like big data to master them. 

Thank you very much. Very, very interesting 
indeed. And let me go now to Joanne Kubba to talk  

about what Uber is doing here. And how you 
are contributing to those three different  

very important goals that our title mentions.
Thank you so much. And really happy to be here.  

So, over our time in Europe, we've worked really 
hard to find positive and sustainable ways to work  

and partner with cities across Europe. And also, 
in Germany. And we've learned a lot along the way.  

We believe that in partnership with public 
transit and cities, we can create a mobility  

ecosystem where private car ownership becomes 
dispensable. The real question will center  

around how mobility players offer the best 
and most sustainable services for consumers.  

Some of you have might already heard and we're 
really proud that we made a global sustainability  

commitment last year that was actually led 
out of Europe. We will see that Uber will be  

carbon neutral in Europe in 2030. Switching to 
be 50% electric rides on our platform by 2025.  

We're also committing 800 million in resources to 
drivers to support switching to electric vehicles.  

But we can't do this alone. We have to be able 
to partner with policymakers and the EV industry  

to really create the conditions that help us to 
further tackle things like appropriate    the lack  

of appropriate charging infrastructure, the lack 
of affordable and secondhand electric vehicles.  

There's currently insufficient financial 
incentives to close the interim cost gap.  

But also, we need to make sure that there's 
enabling policies that facilitate EV transition  

for drivers specifically in our case. For 
example, subsidies on secondhand electric vehicles  

or emission based road charging that 
is applied to emitting vehicles. 

But also, we need to make sure we're 
tackling outdated national regulations  

that cause inefficiency and 
prevent drivers from electrifying.  

We have rules like return to garage which is in 
Germany or in Italy which can lead to actually a  

higher and even sometimes double the amount of 
kilometers driven. Half of which is without a  

passenger. Now, if you think about it for electric 
vehicles, that actually means twice more charging  

needed because the vehicle is running empty. 
So, we see a lot of opportunity. And I think  

that there's a lot that Europe in particular 
and the cities around the space are really  

tackling. And we want to be a partner to many 
of the thinkers that are leading this space. 

I want to come back to electrification in just a 
moment. Because clearly that is one of the main  

Nexus spaces where energy and transport 
will converge going forward. But let me  

first ask a little bit more. And I think this 
one goes to I would say to Meike Jipp. Also,  

with your overview of policy and planning. Our 
audience question. User pays and polluter pays.  

A slightly naive observer might say, why is that 
not already happening? So, what exactly    what  

obstacles have to be overcome to ensure that does 
happen and that we do bring in externalities and  

help assign responsibility for them. 
And what difference would it make? 

I was actually smiling when I saw the answer 
to your questions from the audience. The  

reason for that is that at least according to 
our experience, that the policy part doesn't  

work if we actually increase the taxes to 
cause the kind of behavior that we wanted  

to observe. Because typically in our 
models, it hardly changes the models.  

So, we cannot convince humans to use, for example, 
an environmentally friendly way of transporting  

by raising the taxes for environmentally 
unfriendly behavior. That's a totally  

different point of view with regard to the 
energy framework. But in the mobility framework,  

it hardly works for the whole population. 
There might be differences, of course,  

from one human to the next. From one individual 
to the next. But in the broad majority, we don't  

observe a positive effect of such punishments.
And as a psychologist, I have to tell you  

there is also another point of view. It's also a 
matter of learn the right behavior and not only  

punishing the behavior. We actually need to think 
about combining two different types of solutions. 

Very, very interesting indeed. Thank you 
for that. Let me drill a little bit deeper  

now on electrification. And as mentioned, that is 
where the inter linkage becomes very, very clear.  

Joanne Kubba mentioned a couple of the obstacles 
or the areas where there needs to be improvement.  

But I would like to ask all of you to weigh in 
on this. And also, on where you see the limits  

to electrification in the mobility sector. 
Which in some ways goes also to the question  

of the role of green gas and    green hydrogen. 
Whether you think that this is going to  

become a major contender in    in transport.
So, let me perhaps start with    with Corina  

Apachite and get a take from the others as well.
Yeah. So, the electrification mobility takes  

all of us to succeed towards this 
development. It's not only about  

mobility providers and suppliers. But also, the 
end user and the people in the legislation. And  

we all have to go with this challenge and 
provide the solutions, use the solutions in  

their life. And that's why maybe it takes more 
time that we would like to    to have it. This is  

one aspect which you have to accept. It 
needs all of us to succeed with this     

with the common goal that we have. Electrification 
is about infrastructure as well. So,  

it needs to have the possibility to 
re charge the electrical vehicles.  

It's something that needs to reach the mass.
Everybody has to have the possibility to  

own the vehicle, to use it. But 
there are ways to right it. There's  

a challenge. And there are various aspects and 
all of them have to reach a certain level. It's  

to reach a certain penetration such as to say yes, 
we managed to evolve towards this common goal. 

And what is also important is to let 
certain technology freedom. So, just  

environmental goals are important, yes. And 
we need to reach them, to fulfill them. But  

what is necessary is to have the technological 
freedom. It's up to any player in this to use  

the corresponding technology which meets 
the level of CO2 goals, for example. 

Let me ask you a follow up question that's 
come in from the audience. In some ways,  

it plays off the last point that you made. That 
the premise of this question is the following.  

E mobility requires synergies between charging 
points and E networks and adequate for all  

three. And at the same time, you have talked 
about technological freedom. I put in that part.  

How best to look at the two aspects and how 
best to confront in asks the audience member? 

I'm very much biased by artificial intelligence 
and the usage of data. And if we start to  

regulate these areas, then a lot of 
experimentation, a lot of developments  

are contributed. So, we have to take it to 
be very careful in the sequence or do what?  

To have the regulation of something that doesn't 
exist yet would be prohibitive. And there are  

certain solutions which cannot be developed. The 
targets, yes. We need a technological freedom  

to reach those goals.
Okay. Thank you very much.  

Joanne Kubba, your thoughts, additional thoughts 
on electrification and how to meet the challenges. 

Yeah. So, I mean, I definitely would go back to 
a lot of the points I was saying earlier which  

is that it is going to be really critical 
for us to find those three elements come  

together at the same time. I think it's 
absolutely right that we have to have the  

technological freedom to be able to really show 
progress and move the needle in terms of what  

the dynamics of society are really looking 
for. But equally, if we want to make  

big shifts for people to actually make 
the right choices. And we have to create  

accessibility. So, making sure, for example, 
when it comes to lack of charging infrastructure  

that those aren't just built in or placed in 
areas that are high traffic. But actually,  

placed maybe in neighborhoods in which people 
that would use them not just for personal use,  

but for actual work. So, drivers in communities 
where they live so they can charge and then be  

part of the contribution of making sure that 
when they're on the road earning on a platform,  

they're actually also using an electric vehicle.
Affordability. And so, I see that those things  

go hand in hand. They go very much in line with 
the governmental regulations that are being put  

in place as well as private sector, as well as 
creating the regulatory environment to allow and  

foster these things. So, I think that absolutely 
you have to create the right freedoms. But I think  

that they can't be done separately. All these 
things have to come together at the same time. 

And Meike Jipp, speak to the general question, 
also, if you like. But I have a couple of  

audience questions in addition that have come 
in. Also, that one about mobility requiring  

synergies between manufacturers, charging 
points and E networks. And maybe I'll wait  

until you answer that and then pose the other two 
because they take us away from electrification. 

What I would like to do in my answer 
is to emphasize is the human aspect.  

Humans make decisions about how they are 
mobile. About how they want to be mobile.  

Humans are typically used to routine. So, for 
example, they use a car because they have used it  

the past weeks, months and years. So, if you 
want to change this behavior, you have to create  

an incentive. And you have to ensure that the 
humans have the right to model about that change.  

If you're convinced that the electric car will not 
get you to your destination, it's very unlikely  

that you will actually use it. And it's actually 
quite rarely that humans really check whether  

their mental models are correct. They just 
believe that it won't work and won't use it. 

So, what we have to do is make sure that 
the humans have the right mental models,  

and they see the options out there on our 
streets that are coming under development.  

And convince them that it's actually a good 
idea it use it. And for that purpose, it's also  

not about infrastructure. If you're convinced 
that you have no chance to use an electric car,  

it's unlikely that you're 
going to use it or buy one. 

Yeah. And that gets back to Joanne Kubba's point, 
if you make it easy for people. If you put it  

in the logical, easy place where they would 
expect to find or would be glad to find it,  

then obviously you maybe have some chance 
to influence their behavior. Let me ask you  

a couple of other questions that have come 
in. One of them, getting back to your point  

about taxing and offering incentives. And this 
question is, Professor Jipp, taxing polluters  

without offering alternative opportunities is 
a barrier and clearly that could be said even  

if you're offering incentives. So, yeah.
Yeah, you have to have the option. That's  

right. That's what I was actually assuming. I 
saw one study which actually like there was a  

new infrastructure developed for bike users. The 
problem was that nobody was using it. The people  

still used their car to drive, for example, 
to the center of the city. And there was  

something more in the bike infrastructure. 
And that city, there was an app developed.  

Tracked automatically whether or not the users 
drove by car or used their bike. And when they  

did the right behavior with their bike, they 
collected points. And after they gained a certain  

amount of points, they received a reward that was 
at the beginning a cup of coffee. A small reward. 

And after a time, they received a prize 
for being an environmentally friendly  

bike user. And that actually increased the usage 
of this bike infrastructure. That's a very easy  

way of rewarding the right behavior. And it's 
easy to implement. It's not that difficult. 

And let me put one more audience question 
to you that's a planning question. But the  

others are invited to weigh in if they wish. 
It partly goes back to what we were discussing  

in our livable cities panel actually a while 
ago this afternoon. How we get coherence between  

city based infrastructure and planning and 
national schemes. So, this audience question  

reads: How to move toward intelligent mobility 
when most countries invest more in infrastructure  

for additional mobility than in things like 
sidewalks and bike lanes. Now, sidewalks and bike  

lanes often are city decisions. Whereas national 
policymakers are working in a different framework.  

First of all, to you, Meike Jipp, how do we get 
that better joined up than it is at the moment? 

From my perspective, the best 
way is to show the good examples.  

To look into the world and see which    which 
solution was implemented in which city. How did  

it work? And was the city successful? And is that 
solution transferable to my city? So, my state?  

And if you reach the right persons, that's, of 
course, a great point, we have a chance to also  

change the national schemes. It's a 
challenge, of course. It also takes  

time. But my experience is if you have the good 
examples, and if people see how these examples  

will also solve their solutions, there's 
a chance that, as I said, it takes time. 

Another audience question that came in a way 
speaks to the same point. And it's about the  

complexity of the decarbonization challenge 
in the transport area. So, maybe I can  

put this to you, Joanne Kubba, because it links up 
also. Who are the main people you're talking to?  

Is it at city level? Is it national? Is it both? 
And in some ways, do you find yourself becoming  

a vector for transferring best practices? Is 
there some degree to which you can suggest, well,  

look, you know, we've seen this interesting 
solution being used here? Think about it. 

Absolutely. We work both city level and 
actually at national level. But also,  

even at the EU level. And so, I think that it's 
really important that we actually don't silo  

ourselves into one conversation. It's actually 
why one of the big reasons why I love working  

at a big company like Uber. Because the impact 
you can have in the conversation is so varied  

and dynamic. Because as was just said, it's 
really important for us to understand how  

cities are moving. Different cities moving 
different ways. And it's really critical that  

we're able to understand and work with cities 
and national governments to implement city  

practical level solutions that make sense 
for the dynamics of that city. But also,  

we need to laser up and understand what 
you think of from a strategic level. 

In terms of us being a vector, I think that's 
super spot on. You know, there's a lot we can  

learn from one another around the world. And 
I think one of the benefits of being a large  

global player is that we're able to see examples 
that come through from different places. So,  

for example, early on in Dallas we had done a big 
transit partnership there where we were able to  

work with the Dart system to be able to give users 
the choice to Uber to the closest public transport  

spot. And from there, take a transit solution. 
Being able to use technology to incentivize people  

to move around in a more sustainable way is 
actually something that I think we can do  

hand in hand and learn from different cities 
around the world. We've also taken a lot of  

learnings from what we have done in one city in 
Europe and transplanted that across to others. And  

then also in terms of data and how to understand 
that data and urban planning data is something  

that we really want to work with cities on.
So, absolutely, I think these conversations are  

dynamic at every level and very multifaceted.
Thank you very much. And last question goes  

to you, Corina Apachite with the 
request for a somewhat brief answer.  

That complex CO2 challenge, of course, means 
for a company like yours really in many ways  

transforming its own business model. So, let me 
ask you kind of a two part question. In general,  

how do you think that business model will look, 
say, 10, 15, 20 years from now? And secondly,  

innovative solutions within the company. How do 
you test them and scale them up? Because I    I  

had a very interesting conversation back at the 
end of last year with none other than Elon Musk  

forward to the big battery factory that he's 
building here outside of Berlin. And he said  

the single greatest challenge they face is 
scaling up pilot ideas. Innovative new ideas. 

So, last question would go to you about 
those two aspects. Transformation of the  

business model in general and then testing 
and scaling up innovative new possibilities. 

So, relating to the first part of the question. 
Business models in the innovative business models.  

They have been much more agile. Derived 
from customer needs. They're not from  

engineers that were working previously to 
be successful. Related to the second part  

of the question, I agree. It's pretty hard to 
overcome this threshold from a prototype to some  

mass consumption for everybody. We have different 
stages with the Continental. We will try something  

in the IT department that I'm working with to 
transfer in a bigger community of the Continental.  

We have different partners as well. Universities 
with public alternatives. And this is how we  

extend the innovative product. And so, doing 
that step by step, we hope to bring the right  

innovations on the road, on the street. 
And to contribute to a safer, cleaner and  

more intelligent transportation of tomorrow.
Meike Jipp, I saw you nodding so emphatically  

when I mentioned scaling that I think I will go 
to you for one last, last word on that point. 

I think it's    it's a crucial issue, scaling up. 
And from my perspective, the most important point  

here is that we actually go into the real 
world at an early stage of the development  

of the systems. Check whether our ideas 
about the solutions are actually valid.  

How do people react in their solutions? And 
think of what could actually ruin my idea?  

And if that was an idea that's so good that nobody 
can actually say something negative about it.  

And in addition to that, manage to have real 
world in a representative setting. These different  

cities also use, for example, some urban space 
and confront the real world with these ideas. 

And if it's    if that idea survives there, I'm 
sure we will also manage with the scaling up. 

Thank you. Thank you very, very much to all three 
of you ladies for this very insightful exchange.  

I appreciate very much that you could join us 
for this discussion and wish you all the best.


