Dear colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I truly wanted to share with you some thoughts about the period we're living.

Because the pandemic has not made the climate change fade away. On the very contrary,

 I fear everyone has become more conscious of potential consequences of what was unthinkable before. 

And we as political leaders are all aware of the few years left to change everything.

To achieve a massive transformation of our societies, of every part of them.  

And to do so, we need decisive and result action.  Since last September, we have a new European target, a stronger one.

Europe is the first continent that commits to achieve carbon neutrality.

Now, we must convert this ambition into a robust and efficient legislative framework.

  We need to make it a reality in every European country.  Implementing concrete action on every level.  

Because we must go beyond nice words and political statements. We have a duty to deliver. 

And to reach these goals, France goes further and father.  We will be closing our last coal power stations in 2022. 

We're cutting public subsidies to carbon based energies.  We are strongly committed to accelerate the development of renewable.

We aim at 33% of renewable energy in our consumption by the end of the decade.  We have put in place a massive ecological recovery plan.

30 billion Euros are on the table to accelerate the transition.  To improve our building performance through global renovations. 

To develop a greener, cleaner mobility.  To de carbonize our industry quicker and boost innovation. 

But the transition that we need facing the chalenges of our time is not only a question of shifting away from coal or gas,

it's not only a matter of energy production and consumption,

it's also a question of bringing back common sense in our day to day life in the way we all live, study, travel, consume goods and use space.

This is my goal. With an ambitious climate law from the hard work of 150 French citizens and their proposals. 

It will give our country a new dynamic as well as tools and regulations to make the ecological transition a reality.  

To walk the last mile to a greener and fairer society. 

So, ladies and gentlemen, you can trust France's commitment to act with determination and ambition.  

To accelerate a real ecological transition in all fields of our life.

From energy to mobility, from consumption to education.  A transition that will protect the climate,

create jobs, and economic opportunities for all.  With that in mind, I will wish you all a very fruitful dialogue.


