Joining me now are this year's two winners, 
Rebecca Sands and Tamsyn Lonsdale Smith  

who won with their idea entitled From 
The Green Economy as a Russian Foreign  

Policy Chalenge to Bio-methane as an 
Opportunity for Market Participation. 

Hello, Congratulations to both of you and 
thank you so much for joining me today. 

Thank you so much for having us. We're very 
glad to be here and very happy to have our  

ideas put on such a platform.
Thanks for having us, Jennifer. 

Thanks so much. Speaking of your ideas, 
Tamsyn, maybe an idea about your idea.  

What was the topic of your winning idea?
So, my idea had to do with    so, given the  

title, a green economy as a Russian foreign 
policy challenge to an opportunity to market  

participation, we wanted to bounce off this idea 
much Russia looking at green growth within Europe  

which traditionally consumes a lot of natural 
gas imported from Russia. And the green economies  

and seeing this as a challenge to their energy 
security. To really looking at how we can start  

developing in Russia and trying to transition from 
natural gas to bio methane as the main fuel they  

could be importing into Europe. Possibly using the 
infrastructure such as the north stream pipeline. 

So, I wonder, Rebecca, why is your idea 
then relevant to the energy transition  

and how can contribute to energy objectives?
We find it relevant in a few different ways.  

One is on the technical side of things. 
It's a very concrete way that we're using  

existing natural gas infrastructure to push 
along this green transition. And we also see  

it as something, you know, we talk a lot about 
everyone needing to join together to collaborate  

together for stakeholders to come together and 
find solutions. Both existing and new solutions.  

And for us, this is really a concrete project 
that it allows    it allows, you know,  

these huge regions to come together 
and build something together. 

And we think that's at the heart of 
the green energy transition really. Is  

a mutually beneficial agreement where, you 
know, stakeholders have a vested interest  

in finding solutions together. And I think our 
project is really built on these principles. 

Thank you. And Tamsyn, I wanted to ask, what 
conditions are necessary for this proposal  

to really be successful in Europe and in Russia? 
What are the challenges that it presents as well? 

Sure, but if I could just backtrack and also 
answer the question that you were posing to  

Rebecca as well. So, for me, why I think this is 
such an important thing for the energy transition  

is, it just seemed crazy to me when I learned 
about the untapped bio energy potential in Russia.  

I saw    I think bio energy and green gas. 
Because there's a potential estimate that came out  

of bio energy, the landfill and energy sectors 
and others. And according to the is studies  

from the researchers at the Institute 
in Russia which we cited in the paper,  

only about 12% of the current bio energy 
is being used in Russia today. Just 12%.  

So, a potential figure they found is equivalent 
to about 65% of the natural gas fueled heating in  

the entire country. And 30% of the total heat 
and electricity production in Russia in 2018.  

So, as you can imagine, there's another untapped 
technical potential of bio energy is massive. So,  

we also thought about the fact that natural 
gas is sometimes viewed as a transition fuel. 

And we would like to think that bio methane 
could be a transition to a transition fuel  

of that transition fuel if you see what I mean. 
Natural gas is there, but we improvised upwards  

and need to transition as quickly as possible. 
For us, it was important for us to focus on  

bio methane in this paper particularly.
Exactly. I would like to ask, though,  

what conditions do you need for this 
to take place in Europe and Russia? 

Of course. Political challenges. The institutional 
barrier where is within the Russian government is  

not    for energy per se, but there's not 
an economic focus. Most of the subsidies are  

allocated to fossil fuels. 
There are some for natural gas.  

There are some policy mechanisms in 
place. But those can be improved.  

So, other conditions would be sort of improving 
the technical capacity as well in Russia. And  

I'm sure we can speak about some things, but in 
Russia, we need expertise which is something we  

tried to address with our technical and knowledge 
transfer program. Partnering up with technical  

Universities and institutions in Russia to 
improve the amount of specialized trained  

professionals who would be able to implement 
these new bio methane green gas projects. 

Rebecca, maybe you can speak to what challenges 
might face the European side of things. 

Yeah, I would say as a whole I think this 
applies to both countries. But I would say,  

you know, it needs to be an agreement that's built 
on compliance and trust. And an understanding that  

there's a mutual interest for an agreement 
that is both economically beneficial and  

achieves decarbonization goals at the same time. 
It's really an agreement of all parties in a  

situation that's already had a really tough road 
politically and economically and regulatory wise.  

But that has real potential and that both 
parties see the potential in that. So,  

I think from the EU side, obviously, there 
would have to be a significant amount of trust  

and    and understanding of what the agreement 
is and how it's going to be carried out. 

And I would say, also, a regulatory 
environment that's flexible enough  

in Russia. A regulatory environment that's 
flexible enough to be able to apply the EU context  

to Russia. Understanding that it's    it's 
not the same region, it's not the same,  

you know, kind of structure. So, the lessons 
learned, and the best practices need to be applied  

to Russia. But it needs to be flexible enough 
where it can adapt to the context of Russia's own  

landscape. Energy landscape. So, the 
main challenges are technical, economic,  

market based and institutional in nature. 
So, taking those    those    taking what we  

can from the EU context and applying it to Russia 
needs to remain flexible in these circumstances. 

And I think the last thing is at least in terms 
of the transition from natural gas to bio methane,  

well, natural gas is still being provided in 
the US. And one of the main ways this will be     

about methane linkage and control and 
third party monitoring in terms of the  

continued use of natural gas up until 2030.
So, I want to ask you both, and Tamsyn, maybe you  

can answer first, do you have concrete next steps 
in mind? What comes next exactly? Do you know? 

So, we have many different ideas bouncing around 
between the two of us. And we would love any kind  

of external input on our ideas. That would be 
wonderful. One thing I would like to research  

further is I mentioned the technical potential of 
bio energy. I think more studies need to be done  

on what portion of this could be feasibly 
turned into a bio methane and green gas.  

I would like to see geospatial studies, so, 
mapping studies to check out proximity analysis  

to see how    in Russia how close do we have these 
potential me thane and green gas sites to existing  

natural gas infrastructure and how costly would it 
be to connect these things? One of the barriers,  

of course, is that Russia is a big country 
and infrastructure isn't always there. But  

trying to pinpoint the most cost effective 
points that are near existing infrastructure. 

And I think you know, there are subsidies for that 
grid connection cost. So, that's something that  

should be utilized, and we should find out where 
those cost effective points of connection are. 

Thanks, Tamsyn. And Rebecca, 
briefly, before we have to go,  

concrete next steps from your perspective?
Yeah, I think, you know, we came about this idea  

very organically. We started to conduct research. 
We knew that we wanted to write something for  

this challenge. And we    we    based on the 
research that we did, we came about the idea  

very organically and it kind of just, you know, 
rolled downhill from there. But this was really  

a first pass at this idea, you know? We conducted 
some initial research and we put it into a project  

so the BETD and obviously, you know, it got some 
great feedback. And to those that we've spoken  

with thus far, the idea is very interesting.
And we've also had feedback that it's a worthwhile  

project to keep working on and to continue to, you 
know, expand the research, expand the potential,  

for example, the PTA agreement that we suggest 
in the second half of the    in the second half  

of the paper which is really the concrete way 
that a project like this could get    could be  

enabled in the context of even Russia and their 
energy context to the EU. We are looking for any  

opportunity that allows us to keep working on 
the project. Whether it's a bit of funding or  

an institution that likes the idea who is 
willing to take it a bit further and see,  

you know, see what else we can do with it really. 
If it can become more of a concrete proposal. 

I have to say, it is really fabulous 
to be here with you both and  

to listen to the passion with which 
are you speak about your project.  

Thank you for taking the time to join us on the 
second day of the BETD. Congratulations again. We  

have Rebecca Sands and Tamsyn Lonsdale Smith. 
The winners of the green recovery challenge.


