Ladies and gentlemen, John Kerry recently said 
that, I quote, "The climate crisis puts young  

people today at the losing end of perhaps the 
greatest abdication of generational responsibility  

in history." And certainly, that is 
the perspective that we just heard  

from those two young climate activists. So, let 
us return now to the topic of what we can do at  

diplomatic multilateral level to change that 
and in particular, through renewed transatlantic  

cooperation. Our next panel discussion is entitled 
Game on for transatlantic renewable aspirations.  

And that title, ladies and gentlemen, 
clearly references the fact that,  

as Joe Biden has put it often, America 
is back when it comes to climate policy. 

As we have been reminded several times over the 
course of the day, one of President Biden's first  

actions was to rejoin the Paris Agreement. And in 
fact, new momentum is also being driven by energy  

partnerships like the one launched right here at 
BETD between the German government and Canada. So,  

can we rebuild and widen the Transatlantic Climate 
Bridge that was established back in auto2008  

and make it truly doable and effective in what has 
become a race against time? We want to talk about  

the opportunities, but also the challenges 
and the priorities for how we move forward. 

And we have a great panel to address all of 
those subjects. I am going to ask our audience to  

very quickly go on to Slido and answer our first 
Mentimeter question, our first audience poll for  

us. You'll see that if you are a registered user. 
You will see it on your screens under the Slido  

window. And if you'll just go on there and answer 
that question, then we'll come back to it shortly  

after we've introduced all of our speakers.
And now it's my pleasure to    to  

tell you about our speakers and I'm going to keep 
our intros very, very brief in order to maximize  

our time for discussion because we have a very 
compact window here. I begin with the European  

Union commissioner for energy, Kadri Simson. Great 
to have you with us, welcome. Joining us again is  

the US presidential envoy for climate, former 
Secretary of State John Kerry. Great that you  

could stay on for the panel. Canada's Minister 
of natural resources is with us, Seamus O'Regan.  

Also, with us, the foreign minister of Italy, 
Luigi di Maio. And Germany's Peter Altmaier who  

spoke with us earlier today is with us once again. 
Now back in his office joining us virtually.  

And let me ask our technicians whether we can now 
in fact get that audience poll up on the screen. 

So, all of our speakers also get a quick chance 
to look at it. So, we had asked, given the  

Transatlantic renewable aspirations, which sector 
would you personally invest money in and why? Far  

and away the biggest share there saying green 
hydrogen. We also see offshore wind, battery  

storage. In fact, John Kerry mentioned the battery 
plant being built right now here outside of Berlin  

as a Trans Atlantic endeavor. That being, of 
course, Tesla that is doing that investment.  

Electric mobility also here. Solar, wave energy, 
storage. So, just a few    a few terms there from  

our audience. Thank you very much for that.
Now, I would like to begin our interactive  

discussion with our speakers. And as I said, 
we're on a terribly tight schedule. So,  

I'm going to request that you really try to 
give us statements that are 3 minutes or under  

and I'll begin with an opening impulse 
from our host, Peter Altmaier. Please. 

Yes, hello, everybody. Good morning, good 
afternoon, good evening, wherever you are.  

I'm really delighted to welcome such 
a distinguished panel today. And I was  

delighted and inspired by John Kerry's speech 
a couple of minutes ago. It was a clear sign of  

commitment and leadership. And we 
need and we deserve that leadership.  

Because we are all now in a situation where the 
pressure has been replaced by hope. Where the  

doubt has been replaced by willingness for action.
But the window of opportunity is very small. When  

we have to cancel the Berlin Energy Transition 
Dialogue day and the physical presence a year ago  

as a consequence of COVID 19, we were all somehow 
depressed. Now, I must say, I'm very happy and  

relieved that so many thousand people around the 
globe can follow our discussions. Young people.  

People from all generations. People in 
developing countries, emerging countries,  

and industrialized countries. And we have to 
prove our ability, our willingness to deliver. 

John Kerry has made it clear in his keynote, 
we have a little bit more than half a year  

to accomplish all the necessary decision making 
in order to guarantee a successful COP meeting  

in Glasgow. And this is important. We have the 
Americans back. We have lots of industrialized  

countries that have signed commitments to achieve 
climate neutrality 2050 at the latest. We have the  

Green Deal when it was decided. Europe seemed 
to be a very strange animal. It seemed to be a  

very isolated approach. Now it is followed by 
so many others. And this gives us an opportunity  

to make this energy transition, this climate 
protection cheaper as it otherwise would be. 

To make it faster as it otherwise would be. 
And it means we have to enhance cooperation.  

All the key words that have been mentioned by 
Melinda are so enormously important. Energy  

transition is a systemic challenge. And we have to 
develop the renewable energies. We have to phase  

out coal and fossil fuels as soon as possible. 
We have to make sure that sector coupling  

is achieved between the different sectors 
where energy consumption takes place. 

In Germany, indeed, we have played a role in 
inspiring the use of renewable energies by  

providing high fees in tariffs. It was extremely 
expensive. But today renewable energies have  

become competitive in many countries and many 
areas. When I was appointed the Secretary of  

energy and energy in Germany almost ten 
years ago, it was over 10 kilo caught,  

and today, it is below 4. Today we see solar packs 
now being realized without any change at all.  

That is what we have achieved. We have to 
share our experience. We have to benefit  

from cooperation. And I see with enormous hope 
all the new initiatives to promote hydrogen  

solutions. Hydrogen is a kind of missing link. 
It's a missing link because when you want to stay  

competitive, and you want to transform your 
industries. You want to produce green steel,  

green chemistry. Green metals. And 
other products. Then you need hydrogen. 

Green hydrogen produced from renewable energies 
to make that happen. We know that we can perhaps  

by 2035 produce green steel. We know that 
we can produce green products in many areas.  

And we have seen now the momentum in place. 
Momentum that is inspiring companies, private  

businesses, to undergo their own transformation. 
We have to make sure that renewable energy  

remains available at affordable prices. We have to 
make sure. And we have to prove as industrialized  

countries that we can demonstrate that prosperity, 
competitiveness and climate action are compatible  

so that other countries, also developing 
countries, and the poorest countries,  

will follow our example and benefit from that. 
That is a challenge. John Kerry underlined and  

stressed how important it is to act quickly.
And indeed, after 30 years of enormous efforts,  

we have realized we have the low hanging fruits. 
Many of them. But we still are much too slow and  

much too late if we want to achieve our ambitious 
targets. And therefore, we cannot have the delay.  

We must use the next decade to achieve important 
progress and to tell the investors, this is not  

a hype. This is something that is becoming the 
basic policy in all our countries. Therefore,  

I'm so delighted to see this transatlantic. 
If we can provide leadership together.  

If we can join forces. If we can convince 
countries like Japan, South Korea, China  

and many, many others to follow, then we will make 
a difference. Thank you so much for participating. 

Thank you very much, Minister Altmaier. And 
in just a moment, we want to drill a little  

bit deeper on how we triangulate prosperity, 
climate action and competitiveness. But first,  

a second input from our discussion. As this 
year's G20 President, Italy has the crucial  

role in coordinating climate action in the 
run up to the COP26. To the Italian Minister,  

Mr. Luigi di Maio if you would.
Thank you. And the Berlin Energy  

Transition Dialogue, thank you for the invitation 
and I'm very glad to attend such a prestigious  

forum and share with you some sights from Italy 
and the topics of this panel. Unfortunately,  

I am afraid I will not be able to stay 
for the Q&A because I have to leave  

for parliamentary business. I'm very sorry for 
that. My colleagues, and youth, representatives,  

dear John Kerry, today we have been discussing 
the transatlantic renewable aspiration  

in the fight against climate change. 
We should rather correlate climate,  

it has to be clear how climate change 
has been for the last century and a half. 

Earth's climate has changed many times throughout 
history as a sequence of natural process.  

However, we cannot accept that human civilization 
at current stage of advanced technology  

and development is mainly responsible for changing 
it. Therefore, I would like to focus on the value  

of transatlantic cooperation in this part.
The first factor is the transatlantic carbon  

foot fingerprint. According to the international 
agency before the carbon shock, there was  

33 gigatons. Europe, the United States and Canada 
and the main partners such as Japan, the Republic  

of Korea and Australia are home to almost 
one seventh of the world's population. 

However, their emissions still accounted for 
more than one third of the total. The good news  

is that in the past two years, these countries 
had a decline in CO2 emissions from the power  

sector. This is due mainly to increasing role of 
the newest and reaching from coal to natural gas.  

Second, in the transatlantic community, we have 
the best technology to achieve environmental  

sustainability and carbon neutrality. What we 
need now is to push for more green financing. 

And the simplification, to 
incentivize and spark its application.  

On green financing, the EU has been the 
world front runner as the largest issuer  

of green funds worldwide. And the last economic 
forum, it has been said that moving toward a  

sustainable economy by 2050 would represent 
a 40 trillion Euro investment opportunity.  

It's important to mobilize the private sector, 
banks and other financial institutions.  

And then be confident that they will be part 
of this global effort not only because fighting  

against the climate increasing is the right 
thing to do, but also because it is profitable. 

And with a simplification, it is time to cut the 
red tape of bureaucracy into many good projects.  

Including our renewables. Energy efficiency will 
not be possible without administrative efficiency.  

That is the kind of reform the new Italian 
government has been working hard for. 

Third, the most relevant of our resources 
is the awareness of the importance of  

our common values. In the last few months, 
the EU member states agreed to devote more  

than one third of the recovery plan after 
COVID 19 to the European Green Deal.  

The US rejoined the Paris Agreement. Canada 
passed its net zero admissions accountability  

act. The UK introduced the ten point plan 
for green industrial revolution. It seems  

we have a clear convergence trend. And I do 
believe that this is a good news for all. 

As the most influential community of powers, 
the transatlantic community has to exercise the  

leadership in setting the global agenda against 
the climate change. This challenge is also the  

engagement of all countries. We do have to engage 
them. But I think our community still has the best  

solutions and the strongest political will to be 
the standard maker in the green transition era. 

The energy transition is our test. We have 
to work on the essential drivers to step up  

renewables. Cooperation in research, industrial 
alliances, good energy governments, common  

standards and profitability. I'm convinced 
that there is no better coalition than the  

Transatlantic community in order to leverage 
all of these drivers in the most effective way.  

Italy's ready to give its contribution. We have 
global companies in the energy sector and an  

extensive research network and organizations 
that are in the region, in the Western Balkans,  

in Africa and other areas as well.
This year Italy will hold the G20 presidency,  

and we will host the Youth consider Climate 
event and the COP26, pre. And in the same spirit,  

the new Italian government has created a ministry 
for environmental transition. As such, we feel  

a special responsibility in keeping the global 
cooperation efforts towards a zero carbon economy  

and an effective transition. Thank you very 
much. Thank you very much for your invitation. 

Thank you very much, and we're sorry that 
you won't be able to stay for the rest of  

the panel. We understand and wish you a 
great deal of success as G20 President. 

So, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, let me now 
move on to get our panelists' take. And as I said,  

in session is entitled Game on. But we have heard 
speaker after speaker today say that we must up  

our game. So, I would like to talk about that 
now. And I would like to ask very specifically  

for the three panelists who haven't spoken 
yet to tell us what you see as the most  

important steps that the Transatlantic partners 
can take to really up our game, to accelerate  

climate action now in the run up to the COP and, 
of course, therefore as well. So, I'll start  

with the EU energy commissioner, Kadri Simson. 
Please. And if you would, I know it's hard, but 2  

minutes if you can because we still want to get in 
another round of questions after this. Thank you. 

Good afternoon. I'll do my best. But this 
is impossible. Well, I wanted to start by  

stating that I'm a true believer in Transatlantic 
relations. As partners, we need to accelerate the  

green transition, the direction and a vehicle. 
And the direction, we need leadership on both  

sides of the Atlantic and I'm very happy to 
see that the United States is back and an ally. 

So, last week, we welcomed John Kerry to the 
college. John, when I was listening to you,  

I was struck by how your input alone. On both 
sides of the Atlantic, we need to bring that  

leadership to the table. And    in this direction 
and reach momentum. And in 2020, and we have the  

warning. So, we launched hydrogen as a renewable 
energy, and emissions, and for looking at energy  

for buildings. And we are working on concrete 
legislative proposals to reduce greenhouse gas  

emissions by 55% by 2030. This focus on energy 
efficiency and renewables including hydrogen.  

So, international cooperation. Really important.
Our best chance of scaling this renewable fuel  

is to have a global hydrogen with standards. 
It's accelerating methane reductions  

and will in large part fix and be reduced. And 
we are putting in place the leak detection and  

repair. And also promoting global cooperation. So, 
we support the partnership. And the establishment  

of an international methane emissions in 
cooperation with the United Nations program  

and the international energy agency. And 
finally, after that direction, the momentum  

is in place. We need funding. And increase the 
contributions requiring increased investment. 

So, we estimate too that we need to increase 
investment by around 350 million Euros per year.  

These are challenges, but I'm confident we 
get there because also our leaders have agreed  

on the largest project in history. This is one 
thing. And at least 30% of this is dedicated to  

climate mainstreaming. This is our building 
back better after the devastating pandemic.  

And at the same time, public funding can be part 
of the solution. And we are finalizing our own  

private capital over investments. And as partners, 
we need to demand the financial fire power  

to back up our ambitions. And I'm very confident 
from what we're seeing with our Transatlantic  

partners that they will achieve this. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Commissioner. And, in fact,  

you achieved that mission impossible pretty 
impressively. Let me go on to Canadian Minister  

O'Regan. Same question. Main drivers to really 
accelerate our climate action Trans-Atlantically. 

Dr.Crane, first of all, let me take a moment to 
thank the Secretary of the United States for not  

only re engaging on climate action, but being bold 
and unapologetic about it. I recently attended,  

as did he, just two weeks ago a joint meeting of 
our cabinets with our prime minister and President  

Biden. As somebody who was a board member of the 
World Wildlife Fund of Canada, I have are traveled  

to Antarctica to look at the polar regions. In 
Canada, they are telling us how dramatically  

the lands are changing in the north. To be in that 
meeting was a day I did not think would come soon. 

To have the United States not only back talking 
about climate change, no longer omitting the words  

climate change from joint communications, but 
insisting they are there. And this President and  

Secretary Kerry and the cabinet feels, it's very 
inspiring. It's very important that sentiment     

that it's understood how important that is. We 
really do have a chance of upping you are game  

now. We have a chance of doing this. We 
have a chance of meeting our Paris targets. 

I'm broadcasting to you from Newfoundland, the 
northern most part of Canada, halfway between  

Toronto and Ottawa, the centers of our country. 
Out in the middle of the North Atlantic. We  

have seen one environmental crisis only 30 
years ago that saw the northern cod species  

gone after one generation of industrial fishery. 
The biggest single source of protein in the world.  

It's oil now that we depend on. And, of course,  

as any oil producing jurisdiction in the 
country knows, it's been one heck of a year. 

The transition that's happening, the 
movement towards lower emissions in  

the marketplace is happening and it's real. 
And it's jurisdictions like mine that without  

proper guidance and without the proper investments 
in our workers and in jurisdictions like mine,  

like Alberta, like Saskatchewan in my country, 
then without those    without inclusion,  

if you ask me to make a single point here, 
Dr. Crane, without inclusion this momentum  

will not be maintained. People need and want to be 
included. Our energy workers here in this country  

out in Alberta and Saskatchewan in two generations 
figured out how to get oil out of the sand and  

make us the fourth largest producers of oil 
and gas in the world. What I say to them  

is we need the same ingenuity and 
work ethic now to lower emissions. 

And that is not easy. And it will not happen on 
its own. The marketplace is driving investment,  

no question. But it is up to governments 
like ours and leadership like I see before me  

to make sure that happens. Only this 
morning at the International Energy Agency,  

we had our first meeting of a global commission 
of a people centered recovery. It's all about  

inclusion. Christina was there, of course, and 
we really feel as governments that we need to  

ensure that no one is left out of this moment to 
ensure that we maintain this momentum. And ensure  

that the people that we need in order to make the 
transition. It's a lot of complex engineering, a  

lot of hard work. That we don't lose them. I would 
say that is one of the biggest imperatives of our  

government. And I can tell you, having spoken 
to those on the panel and was abundantly clear  

from Secretary Kerry and President Biden, they 
get it. They're working with the unions and the  

energy jurisdictions in their own country 
to make sure that we got everybody on board. 

Thank you so much. And in fact, we're going 
to drill a little bit deeper on that in just  

a moment. But let me first also give John 
Kerry an opportunity to respond in terms of  

what you see. You told us, of course, some 
of this in your keynote. But maybe you want  

to reinforce the message by just telling us one 
or two drivers that you would say the absolute  

most crucial prerequisites to truly accelerating 
our climate action Trans-Atlantically. 

Thank you so much. I appreciate it. Thank you, 
Seamus, for your great comments, and carrying on  

this terrific partnership. It's terrific 
to be back at the table with you and to be  

cooperating together. The key things that 
we need to do. Number one, we have to get  

certainly the 20 largest emitting countries, 
but hopefully all nations that come to Glasgow,  

will raise ambition. And particularly set an NDC, 
nationally defined contribution, by them in the  

reduction of emissions at a level that will allow 
us to keep the 1.5 degree Celsius alive. That's  

critical. We must have the statement of ambition 
and the agreement that we're going to move there. 

We need the transparency and accountability 
that will then follow that in order to guarantee  

that people are real following through and 
it's not a green washing or phony statement  

walk away. This is for real. And nations have to 
step up for this. The second thing, it would help  

a great deal if we had    there's not consensus 
on this yet    a carbon market. A global carbon  

market would be the best thing. But in the absence 
of that, we need to create a sufficient market  

so the price of carbon comes up by the marketplace 
reacting to it. And indeed, you will see choices  

starting to be made that will be common sense 
and business. It will make a huge difference. 

I believe the private sector is absolutely 
key to our ability to meet this goal.  

No government is gonna have enough money, and 
no government by itself can make it happen fast  

enough. The private sector will drive much of 
happens in terms of innovation and research.  

And we need to harness that energy. There's no 
shame in that. We need to do that in the best ways  

that we can allocate capital, harness the power 
of that capital. And so, finance. I've created it  

within our team in Washington. A finance team.
And bringing expert capacity to the table so  

we could help work with the international 
financial institutions, The World Bank,  

the IMF, the development banks around the world 
come together, create new financial instruments,  

conceivably, that are leveraging investment 
in revenue producing endeavors. For instance,  

transportation, revenue producing. 
Energy production, power production.  

Revenue producing. Where it is revenue producing, 
it can be financeable within the marketplace and  

that can bring trillions of dollars to the table.
Third thing we need is a massive global  

cooperative effort to break the barrier of 
discovery, of innovation, of new technologies.  

We will need, even if we got to net 50    even 
if we got to 2050 with net zero, we still need  

to suck carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. 
We need the technologies, direct air capture,  

carbon storage. These things. It's not per se the 
fossil fuel, it's the product, the byproduct of  

fossil fuel. And if that byproduct, obviously, was 
completely contained, then you have what's called,  

you know, abated versus unabated emissions.
To do that may accelerate our capacity to  

be able to get done what we need to do in this 
next 10 years. Ultimately, we got to move to the  

new energy, to hydrogen. I was delighted to see 
hydrogen in that big bold letters there. Because  

I think hydrogen is perhaps one of our greatest 
opportunities as obviously that's a shared point  

of view. Whole economies can be built on it. 
And by the way, some of the infrastructure that  

really exists in the fossil fuel industry can 
also be used to deal with some of that aspect. 

So, I feel    I think those are the most 
critical things. Countries must make this  

decade. 2020 to 2030. It's imperative that we 
do what's necessary to get on the right curve.  

Those are the most critical things in my mind.
Thank you so much for that. So, I would like to do  

one more round of quick questions and answers and 
dig deeper on the point that was made by Seamus  

O'Regan in terms of inclusion. We had another word 
cloud earlier today where climate justice was the  

biggest writing in the very center of the diagram. 
So, let me ask all of you about how we triangulate  

climate action with justice and inclusion. 
And I'll start with Peter Altmaier and ask  

you to talk a little bit    you mentioned 
it yourself. How do we stay competitive?  

Get active on climate and take people along? And 
John Kerry in his keynote commended Germany's  

tough decisions on coal. And yet many climate 
activists would say they're still too slow. 

So, how do you see the 
triangulation of these goals? 

First of all, it is important to take in 
decisions. And when we have taken the decision of  

phasing out of fossil coal and electricity, we are 
blamed for being too late. But now we are seeing  

it's going much faster. And there's a second 
point on this. The triangulation, you mentioned,  

it means we as industrialized countries, 
we have to provide the business models  

that can help developing countries, poorer 
countries, to benefit from energy transition  

and climate protection. I have two examples for 
that. The first example is offshore wind energy.  

We have developed offshore wind 
energy in countries like Germany  

that it can in the medium term perspective 
produce at zero additional cost enormous amounts  

of electricity. Of renewable electricity. When 
you look at the coastal waters around the world,  

there is an enormous potential for the 
installation of new off shore wind capacities. 

And that would benefit the developing 
countries enormously. Because they have a lack  

of electrification and electricity that rely on 
fossil electricity much more than other countries.  

And therefore, this is example number one.
Second example is the    the matter of hydrogen.  

It was mentioned by everybody. Green hydrogen 
can help us in many respects. But industrialized  

countries and densely populated areas quite often 
have not space enough to produce green hydrogen  

for the domestic purposes. Germany is still 
importing about 70% of its primary energy demand.  

And we are ready to import.
That means that oil and gas producing  

countries can substitute their fossil production 
progressively by the production of green hydrogen.  

And developing countries can have a business model 
by producing green hydrogen. And this is something  

that is possible. And the last point is when we 
are talking about electromobility where Tesla,  

John Kerry has mentioned that, thank 
you for that. Is an American company.  

Now the biggest in terms of value in the world. 
But it's becoming an American German company as  

well. They're investing in a battery factory. 
They are investing in a giga factory for e cars.  

And my idea is in the medium perspective E cars 
are becoming even cheaper than come busting  

cars. And batteries are becoming much cheaper 
than they are today. And this will help also  

with developing in the poorer countries to 
benefit from transport and individual mobility. 

These are three examples I think that 
we should deepen in the next years. 

Thank you very much. And let me go now to Minister 
O'Regan and ask you to talk a bit about jobs.  

Canada, of course, is following a two track 
approach on energy. You to still invest  

significantly in the fossil fuels sector 
and you talked about Canada's innovation in  

that area. What do you reply to critics who 
say that slows down the energy transition? 

Not at all. In fact, Minister Altmaier and I had a 
very frank conversation about being very practical  

people. This is happening. I think the transition 
   the energy transition we speak of in lowering  

emissions is happening. Which means it is not 
a neat and tidy business. It's a false choice  

to say we have to choose between the perfect 
or the good. The perfect gets in way of the  

good. We need the perfect and the good. We need 
everything in our quest to lower emissions. We  

are not going to get oil free overall night by any 
stretch of the imagination. So, in the meantime,  

we have to do of the hard work in lowering the 
emissions of the extraction and use of oil. 

And that comes back to people. Again, it's not 
a false choice to say when you're looking after  

people in these energy sectors that you're in 
any way slowing down or subsidizing the present.  

Not at all. This is not an act of charity. These 
are the people that need to do the hard work.  

When I spoke to the head of the crane operators 
union in Alberta when I first got this job,  

we don't care in our cranes are lifting a wind 
turbine or a pipeline, good work is good work.  

When I speak to unions, we are used to retooling 
in the industry. We need to know what we are  

retooling to. When we had the pandemic and 
the demand destruction hit in our country  

and oil going to negative value per barrel, 
what did we do quickly? We invested $1.7 billion  

in looking after orphan and inactive wells. It's 
a highly technical thing, taking orphaned and  

abandoned oil wells, capping them and re purposing 
them. You are cutting back on methane emissions. 

This is something that we knew we could do very 
quickly. Because we need to get to where is next.  

We have been using some hockey    we have been 
using sports metaphors on game on. And I would add  

one in our ice hockey mad country from the father 
of one of our greatest players, Wayne Gretzky,  

Walter Gretzky who died recently. You don't skate 
to where the puck is, it's where it's going.  

The markets are moving now and bringing sea change 
over the course of the pandemic. An accelerate  

on the trends we knew existed. The market is 
moving quickly. But it's incumbent on governments  

to make sure people are not left behind. It's the 
right and proper thing to do and what governments  

should be down. This is not an act of charity. 
These are the experienced, intelligent, educated  

men and women who have shown ingenuity in areas of 
energy and we need to reposition them to lowering  

emissions to wherever and whenever we can.
Back to the audience and the word cloud,  

the audience got it right. All are good 
suggestions. Green hydrogen is something we see  

for our country. Part of the hydrogen plan, green 
and blue. We are going to look at both. Both are  

available to us and both can help lower emissions 
now. This is urgent. There is no question. That  

is why Canada, if you look at the list of 
things that's happening in that word cloud,  

we're doing just about everything. 
And incumbent upon that, I should add,  

in terms of the marketplace and Secretary Kerry 
is absolutely right about them being involved,  

we have a national price on pollution.
A price on carbon. Politically, I can tell you,  

that is not easy. But we did it. Because 
that is a very, very essential instrument  

in harnessing the marketplace and making 
sure that it makes the right decisions. 

Thank you very much. Let me go now to Commissioner 
Simson, and ask you, clearly, it's not only  

North America that faces challenging around the 
public acceptance of the energy transition. But  

also, Europe as well. How do we ensure that 
decarbonization does not further disadvantage  

the most vulnerable and therefore lead some 
member countries to essentially drag their feet? 

Well, first of all, I want 
to say this about this. Green  

is bringing more money and so, more than 
paychecks. There is expected to be among the most  

active in the coming years. Every 
year we have the investment that will  

attract renewable hydrogen and 10,000 jobs along 
the supply chain according to our estimates.  

And same with solar power, 400,000 direct 
and indirect jobs across the supply chain.  

And at the same time in some parts of Europe, 
and solar and wind have become the cheapest  

form of electricity generation. Innovation, 
energy efficiency and renewables help reduce  

dependence on fossil fuel imports. And thus, 
our creating of the jobs and changing. And  

this is clearly important for the economy.
That said, some jobs will not be needed.  

And that's    it has been in every industrial 
revolution in history. But the difference this  

time is we will be very helpful, and this is a 
transition of our own making. And because we are  

benefiting, we are committed to transitioning to 
where no one is left behind. No people, no region,  

and we will support sustainable. We have 
developed the regions and the initiative.  

Based on this experience, we have just reached 
a new initiative with our ambassador partners.  

And also, we have this transition program in our 
countries. And in their regions, investing in  

them. And also looking at carbon neutral there 
too. And initially provide the support for the  

renewables too. And so, we are ready to work with 
the international agencies to do resolutions by  

regions that are most affected. And that 
is transitioning to a green energy system. 

And I would share our experiences and 
the lessons learned opinion thank you. 

Thank you. Thank you very much. And last word back 
to John Kerry. And you did, of course, in your  

keynote talk about green jobs and the enormous 
potential there, so let me ask you a slightly  

different question about the domestic situation 
in the US. It does, of course, remain a deeply  

polarized country. You've got a very, very narrow 
majority in Congress, so talk to us a little bit  

about the degree to which the US can be a reliable 
Trans-Atlantic partner going forward. There is, of  

course, quite a bit of concern in Europe that the 
pendulum could swing again in the other direction,  

so perhaps you could speak to that before we 
close this very, very thought?provoking panel. 

Well, even with Donald Trump there,  

and he made the decision to get out of 
the Paris Agreement. Even as he did that,  

37 governors and the District of Columbia, 
so 38 entities said, no, we're staying in.  

Those 38 entities, states republican and democrat 
represent 80% of the population of America,  

and 1,000-plus mayors in the United States all 
said we're staying in. The day after Donald  

Trump pulled out, lying to the American 
people about why he was pulling out and  

what the rationale was for it, ie too much of a 
burden. It wasn't a burden on anybody because we  

all wrote our own plans in Paris. Everybody 
wrote their own plan. That's not, you know,  

we had Exxon Mobil and major corporations in 
Paris helping to write that. So the fact is  

that the vast majority of the American economy, 
the vast majority of our political entities  

all stayed in Paris. Donald Trump may have gotten 
out, but we stayed in. So this is an exaggerated  

notion. Did it hurt? Yeah, it hurt. Even though 
we were, you know, kept fighting. I remember  

the day that Trump pulled out, governor Cuomo, 
governor Inslee, governor Brown stood up and said  

we're going to stay in. People shouldn't worry 
about what happens. The second reason is this,  

investment is going to take place in the trillions 
of dollars. In new opportunities that we've just  

been describing. New technologies. New jobs. We 
have 3.6 million people today working in advance  

energy technology in the United States. That's 
more people than are working in retail. It's  

twice as many people as are working in hotels and 
it's three times as many people who are working in  

oil and coal. This is the future. And no 
politician's going to come along in a year, two  

years, three years and possibly be able to turn 
around what major corporate enterprises across the  

world and governments are going to commit to. That 
comes to the other part of the question the others  

were addressing is, how do you make it fair? Well, 
we've built tragically ?? and we in America are  

suffering. This is where our anger comes from. 
This is why you see our country polarized.  

Everybody's angry because they know the system's 
been unfair. They know that globalization there  

is vast wealth for a lot of people, but workers 
are working harder than ever to make ends meet,  

put kids through school and all those things. 
People's good feelings or bad feelings about  

government in anywhere in the world. And the 
fact is in too many places, particularly in our  

country ?? I mean, Europe is better on this scale 
than we've done. Up until President Biden passed  

his COVID relief. $1.9 trillion is gonna lift 
children out of poverty. And something like, 25%,  

35%, maybe higher of kids automatically lifted 
out of poverty from that legislation. People are  

going to get $1,400 in this pockets to pay off 
some bills and buy groceries and survive COVID  

more effectively. That is what changes attitudes 
and that is what effectively builds the fabric  

of societies. In our countries. And the truth 
is that people haven't paid enough attention to  

that in the last years. That's why you have this 
nationalized national populism growing in Europe  

and other places in the world. But if governments 
are paying attention ?? and that's why people are  

fighting for justice in this environmental 
transformation. You got to make sure that  

you're doing this in a way that's fair. But if you 
can certain a fair wage and you're doing better,  

there are going to be massive job opportunities 
here, Folx. In America, we don't even have a grid,  

a national grid. In the age of artificial 
intelligence and quantum computing,  

we can't send electrons from one part of the 
country to the other in order to be efficient in  

our distribution of energy. This is what's going 
to come with this transformation. And there are  

all kind office jobs, steel workers, 
iron workers, pipe fitters, electricians,  

construction of all kinds. I mean, a massive 
amount of work is going to be done as we rebuild  

our societies and retool to this challenge. 
That's why I said, and I believe deeply,  

this is the greatest economic transformation 
moment that we've seen. Bigger than the 1990s  

when we had computers and telephone, you know, 
portable phones and so forth. This is bigger.  

This is about moving billions of people. It's 
about how you heat for millions of people and  

power our homes. What kind of engines will fly 
our aircraft. What kind of fuel will they use.  

Every economy in the world is going to be 
positively impacted, provided their leadership,  

as we've been saying, gets them into the game. 
Getting a unified planet, 196-plus countries  

signing on to this future. It's exciting.
Thank you very, very much, John Kerry, for those  

inspiring final words to this panel. Games on. 
Thank you very much, Minister O'Regan, for being  

with us. Unfortunately, Peter Altmaier 
had to leave us for an important meeting,  

but we're very grateful to you for this 
truly energizing discussion that we have had.


