Ladies and gentlemen, it goes without saying 
that development cooperation is going to be an  

absolutely critical part of ensuring that the 
global energy transition is successful. And  

our next session is dedicated to that topic. To a 
high level trialogue on international cooperation  

in achieving the sustainable development goal 
of affordable and clean energy that's SDG7.  

And clearly, this is a goal that crystallizes all 
that we're talking about here at the Berlin Energy  

Transition Dialogue. A goal that would utterly 
transform the lives of the 700 million people  

in the world who still have no access to power.
Astonishingly, that does add up to one in ten  

people worldwide. And more than half of them are 
in Sub Saharan Africa. Which is why for the next  

half an hour, we want to focus on the chances and 
the challenges associated with the green energy  

transition in Africa. And joining us online for 
this dialogue is a renowned special representative  

of the UN, General    Secretary General for 
sustainable energy for all. She's also co chair  

of UN energy and serves as a Commissioner for the 
Global Commission to End Energy Poverty and the  

co chair of the COP26 Energy Transition Council. 
It is a great honor to welcome Damilola Ogunbiyi.  

Thank you for joining us for this discussion. And 
we are pleased to have the direct Director General  

of the international renewable energy agency, 
Francesco la Camera. And we heard from him  

and will drill deeper. And pleased to welcome 
Dr. Jurgen Zattler for the 2030 agenda climate  

and he works with the German Economic Ministry 
for Economic Cooperation and Development. For  

so, in recent years, in fact, the German Federal 
Ministry has seen a doubling of the development  

cooperation budget and a reshaping of its program 
to fully align the goals and the work was Ministry  

with the 2030 agenda. I would like to start out by 
asking all three of you to talk a little bit about  

the chances and the challenges for the Green 
Energy Transition in Africa. Particularly  

in light of the pandemic and its effects 
on green development. Does it cast doubt  

on progress toward achieving SDG7 in Africa? 
And I'll begin, please, with Madam Ogunbiyi. 

I would like to say thank you very much for having 
me today. And thank you for putting it in context.  

To truly understand it, there are millions of 
people that need more access. But there are  

people who have no access. Of which 900 million 
live in Africa and 500 million live in Africa but  

have no access to electrification. To put it 
in this context, these are the people that     

during the pandemic. This also affects women 
more than it affects men and affects children  

a lot more as well. But what we are trying to 
make sure with the sustainable development goals  

is that they're reliable and sustainable and 
modern energy. Is that if we make sure that  

is achieved by 2030, it also helps with other 
sustainable development goals like energy, health  

care, and the other things we're trying to do.
It's also critical for recovering data, right?  

We have to set it where everyone    and the 
investment in sustainable energy is one of  

the quickest ways to get there as my colleague 
Francesco would say. For every 3.5    sorry,  

yeah, 3.5 jobs in the renewable compared to the 
fossil equivalent. And not just the transition  

in Africa. It's important to note that is 
important to what will happen in Africa.  

And what will happen in a developing country. We 
have a responsibility to develop what will be the  

transition for Africa and that is different from 
the global. The world is particular that we know  

that investments in energy will increase GDP, 
increase jobs. And that's the narrative we must  

take in terms of making sure that Africa develops.
Thank you very much. And Director General la  

Camera. To you, whether you are concerned 
whether the pandemic and its effects could  

slow down progress towards SDG7 in Africa where 
fulfillment of that goal is so very much needed. 

Thank you. Happy to be, again, here with the 
general ministry. Happy to be with you. So,  

mentioned the challenges. I think that 
it's affecting the developed countries,  

but it's more affecting developing countries 
and this means Africa. They gave us  

an opportunity for making the change 
happening more rapidly. We have the  

cooperation in fighting the pandemic can be 
also a way that the country from developed  

and developing can join hands to work together. 
So, there is [inaudible]    but at the same time,  

there is an opportunity. And we can see that 
we are not getting it all from Africa. Because  

Africa is many Africas together. So, we 
see that we put in place as we take into  

account of the diversity in the continent.
One aspect is the challenge is not to work,  

in my point of view, on incremental steps. 
But we have to try to work and be ambitious.  

Also, we look at Africa and make the change 
   the changing happening. And keeping in mind  

that there is the energy system of the future 
that we have to go. So, we need to be strategic  

and ambitious. And this is a message for 
the applicant governments. In the last year,  

more than 70% of the capacity that we started.
In Africa, only 2 gigabytes. Very  

small. So, this is a challenge because the numbers 
just say, remember, there are too many people that  

were not enjoying the basic services and 
cooking and other. So, it is imperative that  

today's report Africa to develop also its internal 
capacity is another challenge. To be able to meet  

their growing needs. The critical aspect is the 
action of the formula and to have the investment. 

Concluding, we must act. Energy is 
the single most important level of  

this agenda. This means not only greater 
national flow and sustainable solutions.  

But also, capacity. Moving efforts 
toward the continent with the knowledge,  

skill and capabilities to create and maintain 
energy systems that work for the 21st century. 

Thank you very much, Director General. And right 
over to Dr. Zattler. As I said, the Ministry  

has endeavored to put the sustainable agenda at 
the heart of its efforts. We're hearing from many  

experts that the pandemic could in fact see many, 
many people in Africa fall into poverty. That,  

of course, the effects of the pandemic are 
being felt hardest by many of those who are  

most vulnerable. So, are you seeing that work 
in Africa? And what impact do you think that can  

have on the green energy transition? What do you 
think it's also for your ministry and its work? 

Yes, thank you very much, Melinda Crane. We 
are very worried, that's first. But I would  

like to first reiterate what others have 
said. The big opportunities for Africa. So,  

Africa is the continent with the highest potential 
for renewable energy. And it has the    the unique  

opportunity to meet folk from this carbon 
energy system which is not really there yet.  

To a new modern renewable energy system. And they 
don't have to deal with locking in problems like  

in Europe and in US and also in Asia. It's 
an opportunity. It's a huge opportunity. 

But, of course, that doesn't make it easier. And 
you have heard the numbers that some 150 people  

are falling back into absolute poverty due to 
the pandemic. But also, on the energy sector,  

there are challenges. So, for example, huge 
revenue short falls by the energy utilities.  

People can just not pay their energy bills any 
longer. If you lose your job, it's difficult  

to pay those bills. And this 
has an impact on the utilities. 

So, there is increased assistance in the countries 
with the governments and with these other  

entities. There are huge debts. And this 
really makes it very difficult. Therefore,  

one conclusion is, to focus on those areas 
which are taking into consideration this fiscal  

problem. And one route could be to first 
improve the regular trade frameworks and  

the policy frameworks. If you have fuel subsidies, 
if you have environmentally and socially harmful  

subsidies, then get rid of it. Take the 
opportunity now. If you get rid of those  

distortions, the private sector would come at 
it more forcefully because renewables is already  

the least cost energy source in almost all the 
countries. So, that's one thing you could do. 

The other thing is to    to focus on really the 
key constraints. Which is not so much building up,  

you know, solar plants. It's more 
to lengthen the energy assistance.  

It's the storage problem, for example. And as I 
said, the regulatory frameworks. It's from this  

situation which is really getting 
more difficult. Thanks a lot. 

Thank you very much. I would like to take a keeper 
dive on the question of international cooperation  

and how it can try to facilitate the green energy 
transition in Africa under these circumstances.  

So, let me come back to Director General 
la Camera and ask you to talk about how  

you believe that international partners can best 
support the energy transition on the African  

continent. And do summary with us if you 
can, please, concrete cases and examples. 

Sure. So, first of all, I would say that 
there is    an African country is     

and it's very important that the legal environment 
is ready to attract the foreign investment.  

Because we all know that the public budget is 
shrinking. So, it's very important for it to  

come from private companies. And Africa is also 
the possibility. We have just to remember that  

between the top, the fastest growing economy 
in the world. They are in Africa. And these  

will mean that Africa will also be building.
But these are just facts. But in the continent,  

in the    has 1,000 larger potential of this 
projected amount concerning the renewables. So, we  

have to find a way to make this happening. I would 
like to show what IRENA is doing with a concrete  

example. Two ways. One is we are supporting many 
applicant countries in presenting their indices  

to the basics. This means that is not one mission 
or another. But working with the African countries  

in making their own energy planning and working 
on controlling those in charge of the plan. So,  

that's a very important action that we are taking.
And also, assessing regularly the potential of  

this country. And this report that we have been 
working together with the German governments.  

Giving many ideas on how this is possible. And 
another example is we're planning the platform.  

Where we are together. We have the 
investment platform that's been  

related to some    and planning the Summit 
in 2019. And the initiatives in IRENA.  

And the operations    what we are trying to 
do is build a pipeline of remarkable projects.  

And we have already 200, multiple projects already 
to look for financial contribution. From the other  

side, we have over 300 partners, including the 
main financial institutions, private companies,  

development agency, development bank.
So, we are starting from the next year,  

14 investment firms in the region. And five of 
these sub region are in Africa. We are also with  

IRENA ready to open a new facility together with 
our friends. And we have more than one institution  

that can develop funds for this initiative. This 
will mean that probably we will be ready to spend  

1 billion in investment from the other side in 
the country, not including Africa. This could  

be a concrete initiative that shows a way how we 
can make possible the funding and make the match  

between the needs and those that 
are submitted. Back to you, Melinda. 

Thank you very much. And let me perhaps 
go to Madam Ogunbiyi to get your take  

on those initiatives. And also, a perspective 
from you on both sides of the partnership. So,  

what are African countries looking for 
from international partners? And what  

should international partners, including the 
UN, be expecting from African countries in  

trying to bring the green energy transition 
forward under the current circumstances? 

Thank you for the question. Again, I think 
it's really important that as you look at  

African countries and ambition, there has to 
be something on the table. We're talking about  

to get to a point of access, you need about 13 
billion every single year until 2030. That's  

currently not on the table in terms of financing. 
It has to be. We have to make this effort.  

We have to take on universal access like 
we've taken on the COVID vaccine. It's not  

there yet. It's important to note that Africa is 
responsible for less than 2% of the emissions.  

But it's getting the effect of climate change and 
disproportionately with the rest of the world.  

So, as we call African governments to have 
policies and regulations which are very key,  

something else has to be on the table.
The private sector that are going to come  

in to place have to be in place. 
That's why I'm looking forward to  

this year where we have a high level dialogue on 
energy. We're going to talk about concrete steps  

to really drive innovation and make sure universal 
access is a clean energy transition story. 

The other issue, obviously as people are 
talking, they talk about the transition and  

access as two different things. But in 
African countries, it's the same thing.  

So, it a country tells you how 
they're going to do their transition,  

they have to tell you how they're going to 
power people as well. That's what we recommend.  

We have this year, the transition campaign which 
infuses energy access. But none of these things  

can be done without finance and investment quickly 
from the global audience. And there's guarantees  

with, local financing, resource financing. 
There's so many different instruments that will  

come. And as Francesco said, we are working 
on the climate platform as well together. 

But globally, we are working on our approach 
with Africa. We need to come together and as a  

global leader think big. And not thinking kind of 
small portion of technical assistance. But bigger  

global responses. In my previous role, I was 
in country in Nigerian government which was about  

85 million people not having access. I know 
what challenges government have to go through  

even after they put policy in place. Even after 
they sign that regulation. Getting the investment  

is possible. We have to really think and really 
come together and know that 2030 is our target.  

And if we cannot achieve universal access by 2030, 
we will not achieve net zero by 2050. So, it is  

particularly important that we think of people.
Thank you very much. A very important equation  

there. If we can't achieve universal access by 
2030, we don't get to our decarbonization goal.  

I would like to come back in a moment to talk 
a little bit about EU African cooperation.  

But first let me go to Jurgen Zattler about what 
Germany is doing to support partner countries in  

the transition? What are some of the concrete 
cases that you can perhaps tell us about? 

Yes, first, African governments have to 
make up their mind. Do they want to go  

the old fossil fuel energy 
provision way? Or do they want to go  

the modern and the renewable way? 
Had I think it's their decision. And  

I can tell you that as you know, Europe took 
a decision. We decided with the Green New Deal  

to go the second way. It's not easy. It has 
to be managed. But we are convinced that  

in the mid term, it will be the better choice.
And therefore, with our development cooperation,  

we cannot recommend African countries to go the 
other way. And if we are reluctant to put our  

money in investments where we think it's stranded 
assets. And look at the private sector, what is  

the private sector doing? The private sector 
is going out of carbon intensive investments.  

That's what you can see at the moment.
Not really a green champion in the past,  

they withdrew from carbon intensive investments 
because there's a high risk of stranded assets.  

Transition and physical risks. I don't want to 
go in depth with that problem which is really  

immense. And what do we do? We act on two levels. 
The first one is the multilateral level and the  

second one is the bilateral one. The multilateral 
first. And we will have the spring retreats in  

four weeks time and talk about an early 
replenishment about the poor contribution of  

the World Bank. We will put at an earlier stage 
lots of money into that window. It has to be  

negotiated what role the energy sector will play.
And we will talk about in the    about a special  

rights, there will be debt settlement programs. 
All of this is linked with climate and energy. So,  

that's one    one level. The other one is 
bilateral cooperation. There we have a cooperation  

with 32 African countries in the energy sector. We 
also have a number of initiatives. I don't want to  

take your time at outlining all of them. For 
example, we have a model village in Senegal which  

runs 100% by renewables. We have a green citizen 
energy program for    for African communities  

with some 500, a thousand people connected. We 
invested in hydrogen in Africa, for example, in  

Morocco. But perhaps most importantly, 
we want to focus more on partnerships. 

Because, you know, I'm convinced 
there must be a political will  

on both sides. It's not just that we buy. We don't 
to want buy, you know, these kinds of resource.  

There must be a conviction of both sides. And 
we want to work in particular with governments  

who want to go that way. And we only have 
partnerships with middle income countries, and we  

could imagine to extend them to African countries 
and then we need to join forces and bring together  

our expertise, our money in a bilateral 
way and in a multilateral way. Thank you. 

Thank you very much. And with just a few minutes 
left on the clock, let me go back to Damilola  

Ogunbiyi. And let you just say a little bit about 
two different SDGs and how they interact with the  

EU Africa cooperation. Not only SDG7, clean 
energy, but also the SDG that is dedicated  

to partnership. We're hearing the EU talk a lot 
more about partnership with Africa. It is one of  

the focuses of the current EU Commission.
What about the EU? What steps would you  

want to see it take if it is serious 
about partnership with Africa and SDG7? 

Just like I have been saying, the bold 
partnership comes with financing. I'm very glad  

that my partner from Germany wants to be partners 
with African countries that want to come forward.  

And that is great. And there are quite a few 
African countries that are taking the steps to  

either remove fuel subsidies, or we have seen in 
post COVID plans, insisting on solar connections.  

Again, that comes with financing. That's what you 
can bring. Capacity building, financing and also  

helping the countries determine what their 
transitions are. Just like Germany determined  

what its transition is. And by doing that, they 
also use a number of transition their fuels to get  

there. I think what is happening is not that the 
countries don't want to go renewable, they want  

to know how to transfer the power system to take 
renewables. And that's one of the key things we  

should help them with. Just like Francesco was 
saying. The EU Africa partnership is critical. 

The only way to go and the best way to go for 
your economy, not just climate, is to go green.  

But these are the key steps on how to do it. And 
stop looking at Africa as a country. But it's a  

continent with some very, very unique things. And 
what happens in Senegal might not work in Kenya  

and might not work in Rwanda, right? You have to 
take each country at the same time. But what I  

can assure you what's going well with the EU is 
that people are listening to each other. Coming  

up with solutions that actually suit Africa. And 
that is very encouraging because I haven't seen a  

lot of that going on, you know, with other types 
of discussions. And that's why even at the UN,  

the high level dialogue having African countries 
in the conversations could typically     

it's people determining things without going on 
ground and understanding the peculiar ways. I  

don't think Africa as a continent needs relief. We 
don't need relief if we don't have enough money. 

But the global economy can come together to 
make Africa better. It will happen without  

having Africans firmly in the discussion.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Madam Ogunbiyi.  

Thank you very much to Francesco la Camera 
and also many thanks to Jurgen Zattler  

for this thought provoking talk about energy 
partnership are Africa and how to move forward  

on SDG7. So important for a continent on which 
many, many millions have no access whatsoever  

to power. I'm grateful to all of 
you for taking part in this session.


