What are the lessons from co2 
pricing mechanisms in the world? 

Can we raise the price of 
carbon and avoid carbon leakage? 

What is the right price for co2? 

This session looks at how to achieve carbon 
neutrality within the next few decades.

Ladies and gentlemen, welcome back after that 
very, very short break to a session that has  

become something of a perennial topic here at the 
BETD, carbon pricing. And as we heard just now in  

our "Game On" panel, John Kerry talked about it 
as one of the most crucial drivers of the green  

energy transition. Carbon pricing is often seen 
as the lever of choice when it comes to steering  

investment toward renewables and away from fossil 
fuels. So why is it that carbon pricing remains,  

in the words of "Financial Times" columnist 
Martin Wolf a good idea whose time has not yet  

come. Our title here is Don't Think 
Twice, Set a Carbon Price. In fact,  

more than 40 countries have done that to date, 
either introducing a carbon tax or an emission  

trading scheme. A price that is simply too low 
to propel us to carbon neutrality in the future.  

So the fact is policymakers face a dilemma. 
Effectively raising the price of carbon higher  

could spark carbon leakage, a relocation of 
emitting activities, meaning also jobs to other  

regions with more lenient legislation. What do we 
do about that? What are the lessons learned from  

CO2 pricing mechanisms around the world? What 
measures can actually achieve carbon neutrality  

in the next two decades? Those are the 
issues we want to explore in this panel.  

We have a great selection of speakers. 
We're also very eager to hear from you,  

ladies and gentlemen, both via our chat mechanism. 
If you're a registered user, please send us your  

questions. And also we've got some live polling 
that we want to do in this session. And perhaps  

you're already voting on our first audience 
question. It is this. In your opinion, what is the  

right price of carbon per ton? And we have at the 
moment votes coming in showing a clear majority  

at the moment. Well, actually, not 
a clear majority. The largest share  

says above 100 Euros per ton. Next largest 
share sees it at 50 to 100 Euros a ton.  

Slightly lower share, about a quarter 
of you are saying above 200 Euros a ton.  

And then we have a very, very small share 
saying somewhere between 10 Euros and 50 Euros.  

So, we'll give that some more time to play out 
while I now introduce our panelists. And, again,  

I'm going to keep the intros brief in the interest 
of maximizing time for discussion. It's a pleasure  

to welcome Simonetta Sommaruga. She is member 
of Switzerland's Federal Council and head of the  

Swiss Federal Department of Environment, transport 
and communications . Also glad to have with us,  

Pekka Haavisto. Great to see you, sir. Sabine 
Frank is with us, the Executive Director of  

Carbon Market Watch. And Wendy Hughes of The 
World Bank, leading teams on carbon markets and  

also overseeing the carbon Pricing Leadership 
Coalition. So if we can, dear technicians,  

I'd like to go back to that word cloud one more 
time. To our audience poll to see where we came  

out. Okay. Very interesting. So we've got equal 
shares. 31% of our voters said 50 to 100 Euros.  

Another 31% said above 100 Euros. Just 20% want 
to see us go really ambitious, above 200 Euros,  

and then we've got about 18% seeing the rate 
carbon price are somewhere below 50 Euros.  

So, now let us hear from the panel. And I'd like 
to start out by asking each of the policymakers to  

talk about your own country's approach. And I'm 
just going to remind you, because as always,  

we're very tight on time. I'd be very 
grateful if you could keep this initial  

statement to three minutes or less. So I'll 
start with Federal Counselor Sommaruga.  

What are the main features of the current 
carbon tax in Switzerland, and in particular,  

tell us the secret to your success in instituting 
a CO2 tax that is, in fact, among the highest  

in the world and does include a tax on 
airline tickets and an increase in the price  

of fuel. What can other countries learn from you?
Thank you so much for your question. Distinguished  

colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. I can tell 
you Switzerland introduced a CO2 tax in 2008.  

This CO2 tax has three main features. First, the 
tax rate is automatically adjusted if emissions  

reductions are not on track. Increased from about 
11 Euro per ton at the beginning to 87 Euro now.  

Second feature, two thirds of the revenue from the 
tax is refunded to the population on a per capita  

basis and to the enterprises. One third of the 
revenues versus maximum 400 million Euros is used  

for a program to renovate buildings. Because 
buildings have large emission reduction potential.  

To make people accept the tax, it was important 
that the revenue would not got to the general  

State budget. So funding per capita, this is also 
socially acceptable. And the third feature is that  

large industries are in the Swiss emissions 
trading system which is linked to the UTS,  

and they are exempted from the tax. For small 
enterprises we have a carrot and stick approach.  

The carrot is that they are exempted from the 
tax if they reduce their emissions substantially,  

and in a way, that can be verified. And they 
pay a fine if they don't reduce their emissions.  

Last year, our parliament revised the CO2 law. 
There will be a referendum next June . That  

means our people, the population, will have the 
last word on this legislation and we'll have to  

convince our population about this CO2 law. So, 
this revised CO2 law foresees that, first, the  

CO2 tax on fuels may be increased to 190 Euro per 
ton if emissions are not reduced enough. So we are  

now close to the 200 Euro per ton. Then 
a large share of transfer emissions will  

need to be compensated. Allows for that share 
to increase from 12% at present to up to 90%  

to finance compensation projects up to Swiss 
cent/litre of gasoline up to 12 Swiss cent  

that means 10 Euro cent compared to 1.5 cent at 
the moment. This will be equivalent to some 50  

Euro per ton of CO2. Second point, we'll introduce 
an aviation tax of 25 to 110 Euro per ticket.  

We will also tax private aviation, the CO2 tax, 
at least half of the tax revenue will be refunded  

to the population. CO2 and tax revenues which 
are not refunded will go to a new climate fund  

with up to 1 billion Euro each year. This fund 
can be seen as our green recovery package.  

So, my message to colleagues, to countries which 
consider introducing a CO2 price. First point,  

do it progressively to allow for people and the 
economy to adapt. Second point, be transparent  

about the use of revenues. Refund part of 
revenues, if necessary, with a social component.  

Allocate part of revenues to sustainability 
projects. Third point, give enterprises a chance  

to be exempted if they reduce emissions 
substantially. And fourth point, we have  

to admit that the transport sector and car drivers 
are a very strong lobby. Charge them a CO2 price  

that is politically feasible, but make them 
understand that long term they will have to  

pay a price which fully internalizes costs. So, 
please help us to win our referendum in June.  

We will do everything to have our population 
convinced, and thank you for your attention. 

Your messages are so clear. It seems like you have 
pretty good chances of winning that referendum  

yourself. Let me go on now to Minister 
Haavisto and ask you to talk a little bit  

about what your country is doing. In fact, 
in 1990, Finland became one of the first  

countries to price CO2 emissions through a 
carbon tax. Maybe you can tell us where your  

price level is now in terms of that audience 
poll that we posed a little earlier, and also  

tell us a little bit about the impact that the 
tax has had over this pretty long period of time,  

30 years. What lessons would you want to convey 
to other countries thinking about doing this? 

Thank you, Madam Crane, and thank 
you, first, for the Berlin Energy  

Transition Dialogue for organising this very 
important debate. Through dialogue, we can maybe  

have an equal high green tax level globally and 
first in Europe. And, of course, we are following  

very closely the tenth anniversary here in 
Germany. In many ways, of course, German debate  

has shown the model to others. Currently, I just 
want to advertise a little bit that we have also  

established together with Chile a network of a 
coalition of finance ministers for climate action.  

We have actually 52 finance ministers in this 
network because we think that the fiscal and  

economic policymakers would also be interested 
on green taxes and carbon taxes and discuss  

these issues. Not only leave it to the ministers 
of environment, these topics. As you mentioned,  

Finland was the first country in the world to 
pass a carbon tax and we started taxing fossil  

fuel for environmental purposes in 1990. We have 
a long experience of carbon pricing in transport  

and energy sectors, and in both sectors, carbon 
pricing in the form of taxes and emission trading  

have effectively led to emission reductions in 
Finland. Cars have been taxed on CO2 since 2008.  

Carbon price meeting has proven to be an 
effective measure to reduce emissions and provides  

flexibility for those targeted by the pricing 
mechanism. In 2015, we had a new climate law which  

actually requires cutting greenhouse gas emissions 
by 80%. This government was formed in 2019.  

We decided that Finland will be the first 
carbon neutral country by 2035. Of course  

we are very close. We have to run for that target. 
How emissions have been cut in Finland. Actually,  

we have cut almost 30% from our 1990 level. This 
has not had negative effects on the development  

of economics which is what people argue against 
this kind of taxation. We have long distances in  

the country and all these issues in this country. 
It's an energy intensive country. For that reason,  

what we have achieved is quite good. And we have 
more and more municipalities that have their own  

carbon programs now for the carbon neutrality, 
which is important. Mobilizing itself on these  

issues. And what is the best, actually, our 
businesses and our industries have formed  

climate leaders coalition which they are lobbying 
also globally in their counterparts, the climate  

issue. And I think this role of the industry, 
and it's very, very important in Finland. And  

change, of course, has to be just and, of course, 
has to be distributed evenly. Carbon pricing is  

done in a fair way in our regard. And finally, 
I'm glad to mention that the European Union green  

recovery package. We just discussed that yesterday 
in the Finnish parliament, and we are actually  

stirring 50% of those funds to climate issues. 
We are counting that we can reduce 6% further our  

climate impact with this recovery package. So this 
can also be used for climate purposes. Thank you. 

Thank you very much, Pekka Haavisto. I want 
to go now to Sabine Frank. Your work focuses,  

among other topics, on the analysis of 
developments in international carbon markets,  

so it would be helpful if you could maybe tell 
us some of your key findings on carbon pricing,  

and then I also have an audience question that I'd 
like to bring in after that initial take from you. 

Yes, thank you. We're jumping quite a bit away 
from national carbon pricing. International carbon  

markets follow a very different price logic. The 
logic here is to obtain the cheapest abatement  

option. So it's the pursuit of cheap carbon 
prices. It's a very different logic to those  

of carbon taxes, of cap and trade systems 
where the idea is to get to prices which hurt  

emitters and therefore provide incentives for 
them to reduce their emissions. Consider that  

in the international carbon market, for example, 
where companies voluntarily buy carbon credits,  

the price of one carbon ton is still below 8, you 
know, $8, so a far cry from some of the wishes for  

carbon prices that we saw earlier in the poll. 
And neither our international carbon market is  

actually about reducing emissions as such. Rather 
they serve polluting countries and companies to  

offset some of the emissions by buying credits for 
emissions, which are reduced or removed elsewhere.  

And the challenge for those markets and for the UN 
Climate Conference in November is finally to agree  

on the rules for them and to avoid all of the 
loopholes that might arise, such as the carry  

over of excessively old credits for the danger 
of double counting of emission reductions.  

And the challenge for the voluntary carbon 
market, which is growing because more and  

more companies adopt Net Zero goals and look 
to buy offsets. The challenge there is to  

ensure that these carbon credits, the offsets are 
only used on the back of serious efforts to reduce  

our emissions, and also that carbon credits 
truly represent emission reductions or removals  

and that other desirable benefits are created, 
such as climate finance for developing countries. 

Thank you very much. And just to a quick follow 
up question. Can carbon pricing instruments work  

without offsetting mechanisms? And if so, or what 
alternatives do you see to offsetting mechanisms? 

Yeah, carbon pricing mechanisms should, in fact, 
work without offsets, because offsets always serve  

the purpose of taking away the burden on emitting 
entities. In an ETS, emissions trading system,  

offsets are also risky because you exchange 
real emissions reductions for a credit which  

might or might not represent a real reduction. So 
you're just increasing the uncertainty. And under  

a carbon tax system, offsets effectively lower 
the incentive to decarbonize because you can  

buy a cheap credit instead of paying the tax, 
and, therefore, they would also lower public  

revenues. Now, as to the alternatives, it always 
have to be emphasized that the first and foremost  

commandment is to reduce emissions, and then only 
once currently unabatable emissions are honestly  

established can carbon credits be purchased 
to make amends. But from our point of view,  

it's important that this is not done on a strict 
ton-for-ton compensation logic which leads to a  

Net Zero claim because this is most often prone 
to inaccuracies in the quantifications, and,  

therefore, can be deceptive. What we see as an 
alternative is that companies in particular just  

make climate contribution claims when they buy 
carbon credits. And such practices should always  

be underpinned by absolute emission reduction 
aims with credible implementation strategies. 

Thank you very much to Sabine Frank. Let me go now 
to Wendy Hughes at The World Bank to talk a bit  

about your own findings and about 
the work of the Carbon Pricing  

Leadership Commission. So, first of all,  

what aspects or what mechanisms of carbon pricing 
do you see as most effective and most feasible? 

Hi. Nice to have this opportunity. So, just first 
of all, to thank the organizers for including The  

World Bank. I'm sure most people are aware, 
but our clients or developing counterparts  

around the world, including the least developing 
countries right to middle of developing countries.  

The perspective of The World Bank is from that 
perspective. We have been supporting countries on  

carbon tax emissions, trading systems and 
crediting, shadow pricing, also subsidy reform.  

And in terms of what is most effective, it really 
depends on the context. I think that's been  

the main takeaway that I would like to 
put forward. In many of the countries  

where we work, it is very, very critical 
to look at the distribution effects  

of carbon pricing to make sure that the poorest 
segments of society are not negatively affected.  

It's also very important to understand 
the broader development benefits that a  

carbon price can bring, including freeing up 
resources that would be used for inefficient  

subsidies that then could be directed to health 
or education. It can also contribute to incentives  

to lower air pollutions. So there's a range 
of other development benefits which are very  

critical and can be moved forward by putting 
those carbon pricing mechanisms and finally,  

I think another very important aspect to consider 
is that carbon pricing never happens in a vacuum.  

It's always with other policies, and particularly 
other sets of policies. So understanding what the  

policy is when you're introducing the carbon price 
is very critical to make sure that the pricing  

mechanism has the impact that policymakers are 
anticipating. Just to mention ?? you mentioned the  

World Bank's support for the leadership coalition. 
That is a very important element for sharing  

experience and raising the profile and the voices 
and the advocacy of leadership in carbon pricing.  

The World Bank plays the role of a secretariat. 
It's a voluntary group which comprises  

senior members from governments around the world.  

Chief executives in industry as well 
as civil society representation.  

We also from The World Bank side have a number 
of very, I think, impactful programs. We are just  

wrapping up a program that lasted for ten years 
called The Program for Market Readiness, which  

supported at least twenty countries in exploring 
and preparing to implement carbon pricing,  

ranging from emission trading systems crediting 
and also carbon taxes, and just recently launched  

the program market Implementation which 
has also will support an additional set  

of countries to move into carbon pricing. 
I think let me stop there. That covers it. 

Thank you. Thank you very much to you. Perhaps 
just one audience question to you, Wendy Hughes,  

if you would, because you do have, I think, a 
fairly broad picture of developments. And the  

audience member asked this. If every country 
picks and chooses what activities are taxed  

or have a carbon price and which ones are 
exempt, how can the world achieve its goals? So,  

in some ways this is a question about the need for 
uniform approaches. What would you say to that?  

I would say the it is just unavoidable that 
different countries will be able to implement  

and use effectively different mechanisms. The 
level of income is different. The resources,  

the structure, the economies are so different that 
it is ?? it is just absolutely impossible to say  

that there's one way to tackle this problem from 
a carbon pricing point of view. I think that's  

true of almost anything in the development 
space. Solutions that are not customized to  

the context in which they are supposed to be 
implemented often face a lot of challenges,  

so the trick is to really learn from what 
is working in other parts of the world  

and then take the time and work with stakeholders 
to really understand how that ?? those kinds of  

lessons can be used to build something that 
will work in a particular context. It doesn't  

mean that the end goal can't be achieved, but 
the approach of trying to implement the same  

set of policies or regulations regardless of the 
situation I think is just unlikely to succeed. So,  

taking the time to work through what is going 
to be effective in a particular country,  

including giving the existing policies is 
really necessary and I think can be effective. 

Thank you very much. And let me go back now to 
our two national policymakers on the panel. Both  

of them, of course, from affluent countries. It 
must be said. When you talk about carbon pricing,  

would you say that there are ways to make this ?? 
I guess really it's coming back to the question  

of graduated approaches and benchmarking that 
Counselor Sommaruga talked about, but how do  

you try to bring people along on this journey? So 
back to you, Counselor, perhaps for a word or two,  

and also looking ahead to that referendum, 
what are you going to be telling people? 

Well, first, I think we have to have the 
sensitivity, the consciousness that this climate  

change and this climate crisis is something which 
is ?? we have to do it together. I listened before  

to John Kerry, and I think when you listen to 
him and what he wants to do together with all  

the other countries, then it gives also a lot 
of energy to go on. Second point, I think in  

our country, what was very important is that, as 
I mentioned, we had this carbon tax on the heating  

fuels and we gave two thirds back to the 
population. On per capita. So that means  

for families, for example, if they have heating 
and there are two children or three children and  

the parents ?? so they get back quite a lot of 
money, and at the same time they are invited to,  

for example, change their heating system. And when 
they change their heating system to a fossil free  

heating, and at the same time they get back 
something from the tax, so for them it's really  

a good situation. I think we can show people 
that it's very ?? it's socially also effective  

because low income people ?? people with low 
income, they get back money and they can change  

something. So it's on the one hand an invitation 
to change something, to go to a fossil free  

energy, and on the other hand, you get back some 
money. And with one third of the revenues, we  

keep. So we do not just take it as revenue for the 
State, but we show that we have programs to have  

changes in the buildings so we can really 
show with all the transparency what you  

are doing with that money we take from the 
carbon tax. I think that is something that  

in our country until now it works, and we try to 
go further, but as I mentioned, we have a higher  

CO2 tax now in the next decade if we have not 
attained our goals. So it's ?? on the one hand,  

if we achieve our target, it's fine. If we to 
not achieve, the tax will be higher than before. 

Minister Haavisto, would you also say that is the 
way to bring people around, create benchmarking  

to show them where the money is going plus rebates 
and dividends or do you try a different approach? 

I think it's very important to say while we are 
putting taxes on carbon and energy and so forth,  

we can actually have less taxation on work and 
so forth so that we are changing the whole system  

of taxation. I think it's very typical 
for the new environmental legislation  

and new environmental taxes that there is 
first this kind of opposition. The economy  

is going to collapse and this is a disaster. I 
participated at the Kyoto Climate Conference and  

everybody said that Kyoto minus 8% is a disaster. 
Economics will collapse, of course. First of all,  

it wasn't enough for the environment. Secondly, 
economics can adapt themselves to this ?? these  

environmental realities. This has to be the rule, 
of course. Economic environments can benefit  

of the new markets that are created by 
environmentally friendly energy production and so  

forth. We have a boost on green energy and green 
investments at the moment, and I think this is the  

way to go forward, and this gives some hope for 
also the people that we are changing our system  

and this is going to create new jobs, new 
possibilities for the economy and new growths. 

Thank you very much. So, we're just about 
out of time, but let me ask everybody as  

a final statement of sorts to complete this 
sentence. So, the beginning of the sentence is,  

by 2030, carbon pricing will be dot, dot, 
dot, and I'm going to go to Sabine Frank,  

first of all, just to complete that sentence. Just 
one phrase. By 2030, carbon pricing will be ?? 

A much more popular policy across the world, 
but always in combination with other policy  

measures, such as mandating emission 
limitations and phasing out fossil fuels. 

Thank you. Wendy Hughes, how 
would you complete that sentence? 

I would say by 2030 that carbon pricing will  

play a very significant role in most 
countries' transitions to sustainability. 

Thank you very much. Counselor Sommaruga, 
how would you complete the sentence? 

I would say by 2030, carbon taxes will 
be a well established successful policy. 

A lot of optimism on our panel. Minister Haavisto?
By 2030 carbon taxes will be a global rule. 

Well, let's carry that banner 
forward. Thank you very much  

to all for your participation in this very 
thought provoking, very interesting panel  

on carbon pricing, a policy whose 
time hopefully is now coming.


