Ladies and gentlemen, we have had 
two absolutely amazingly intensive  

days of discussion with leading policymakers from 
all over the world with major energy stakeholders,  

both public sector and private. I think 
we were just saying here in the Weltsaal,  

if there is one silver lining to this format, it's 
the fact that we were able to hear such diverse  

voices from all over the world because it is a 
message that has always gone out here from the  

Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue, but this year 
more than ever, to succeed in transforming our  

energy systems and to get to our decarbonization 
goals by 2050, this has got to be a global  

endeavor. And we've also heard again and again, 
both yesterday and today in so many of our  

discussions, it has to be a systemic, wholistic, 
and a joined-up effort that transcends all kinds  

of boundaries. National boundaries, political 
boundaries, boundaries between silos, and  

for that reason, our farewell is also a joined?up 
effort. We have both of our hosts with us here in  

the Weltsaal to give us a wrap?up of what they 
see as some of the key themes that did emerge  

over these two days, and I will first give 
the word to the State Secretary from the  

German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs 
and energy Andreas Feicht, you have the floor. 

Thank you very much to Jennifer and Melinda for 
your eloquent moderation over the past two days.  

Thank you very much to excellencies 
for the contributions to the BETD  

2021. And thank you very much for hosting us 
and to the team behind this fantastic event.  

We had to cancel last year's event due 
to the COVID?19 pandemic. I'm delighted  

to see that this conference has succeeded in 
gathering so many leaders and decision?makers  

in this virtual new format. The BETD has fortified 
its position as a leading on the global energy  

transition. With more than 50 ministers, VIPs and 
many more high?level speakers and participants  

discussing the opportunities and challenges 
of the energy transition, this gathering can  

truly be seen as a starting point of a global 
Green Deal. Of course we hope that next year in  

spring we will again be able to hold the Berlin 
Energy Transition Dialogue in its traditional  

on?site format and to welcome you all in Berlin. 
I'm confident that this will again be possible.  

We have come a long way since the first BETD 
conference six years ago. The global energy  

transition has progressed a great deal, but we 
all understand that we will still need to speed up  

a lot more. It is excellent and very encouraging 
that more and more countries committed to Net  

Zero 2050 target. We very much hope and push for 
further widening of this Net Zero 2050 alliance.  

After goal?setting, the next challenge is to come 
up with a step by step plan how to get there.  

It's obvious to me that we need international 
collaboration today more than ever  

in order to take the energy transition on 
track. It was, therefore, a great pleasure  

to host the President of the EU Commission at 
our conference. Who made very clear that the EU  

will push the global energy transition 
further with the European Green Deal.  

I was also inspired to hear that many other 
countries are moving in the same direction.  

And with the strong participation of the US by 
Special Presidential Envoy for Climate, John  

Kerry, and Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm, 
the BETD has sent a strong signal to the world.  

The US are back and driving the global 
clean energy transition and fighting climate  

change. Over the last two days, we have covered 
a very comprehensive range of issues. Discussing  

both opportunities and challenges of the 
clean energy transition. We have looked into  

how the energy transition can strengthen the 
competitive edge of our countries' economies.  

And while we are convinced that the energy 
transition is good not only for the world's  

climate, but also for our economies 
and societies, we needn't must forget  

those people who are, at least in the short 
term, negatively affected by the tradition.  

We need to come up with viable solutions 
and offers for them in order to secure wide  

acceptance, which we need to lead this historic 
transformation of our energy systems to allow  

for success. The solutions, recommendations 
and best practices discussed here at the BETD  

are a further step for energy transition and all 
stakeholders in society to move forward together.  

The deployment of renewable energy 
combined with energy efficiency  

remain the key pillar of the energy transition. 
However, some sectors which are difficult to  

decarbonize require completely new approaches. 
Therefore, carbon?free hydrogen will play a  

crucial role in completing the energy transition. 
But even if it combines many advantages,  

yesterday's and today's panel on hydrogen 
showed there are still many challenges ahead  

of us before large?scale utilization of hydrogen 
becomes feasible. To overcome these challenges,  

Germany National Hydrogen Federation puts 
a focus on international collaboration.  

We are looking to build partnerships with 
countries in order to create hydrogen value chains  

and trade links. Our strategy, therefore, includes 
a series of EU and international projects,  

including the integration of 
hydrogen into our bilateral  

energy partnerships and up to 2 billion Euros 
of funding for international cooperation. 

I would welcome as many other countries as 
possible to join that partnership because  

we believe that the success of carbon-free 
hydrogen will ultimately depend on the success  

of international cooperation. And, excellencies, 
ladies and gentlemen, I am particularly excited  

to see all of us working on the energy transition 
in our countries, having the Global Green Deal in  

mind and gather again for the BETD 2022. Next time 
hopefully in person. Again, thank you very much  

for joining. I'm looking forward to seeing you 
next year here in Berlin. Thank you very much. 

Thank you very much, State Secretary 
Feicht. And before I hand over for closing  

words, dear ladies and gentlemen, let me just say 
one more time, we are eager to have your feedback  

on the BETD 2021. Please do go on our 
website. You'll find a feedback form  

there. If you just take a couple of minutes to 
fill it out, we'd be very grateful to you. And  

let me also say ?? express my own thanks to the 
ministries for making this very, very productive  

interchange possible at BETD 2021 to the whole 
organizational and backstage team who have made  

a very complex production go so smoothly. And, 
of course, to all of you ladies and gentlemen  

for your attention and your participation 
throughout these two very intensive days. And  

now it is my pleasure to hand over to the State 
Secretary in Germany's Federal Foreign Ministry,  

Antje Leendertse. Please, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Ms. Crane. Thank you, ladies and  

gentlemen, the global energy community. Thank 
you very much for the kind introduction, and  

I think we now have the situation that after two 
days with exciting debates on climate neutrality,  

Trans?Atlantic relations, hydrogen and many 
other issues, that we have to come to an end.  

And what is my personal takeaway from this 
conference? First, the momentum behind global  

energy transition is stronger than ever. 
You can see that. Nothing demonstrates this  

better than the high?level participation by many 
countries a, among them the United States, India,  

China, Saudi Arabia, but also Panama, South 
Africa, Nepal and New Zealand. In total, 110  

countries worldwide. This momentum is a source of 
optimism for me with regard to the upcoming COP26  

in Glasgow. Secondly, second takeaway, the new 
virtual format of the BETD has allowed us to  

gather even more participants than in previous 
years, and we have been able to span almost the  

whole globe. Melinda has mentioned it, speakers 
from all continents and making contributions at  

unusual times of the day in their time zones, so 
let me thank you especially for this commitment.  

Third takeaway, global energy transition 
will transform the international landscape.  

For example, many Latin American countries have 
recognized the opportunities, the chances to  

become future energy exporters, but also the 
current exporters of fossil fuels have started  

to think about new business models linked to 
renewables. Germany is open to all partners.  

Through dialogue and consultation, we 
want to ensure that the transformation  

takes place in a cooperative way 
and in a mutually beneficial way.  

So, where do we go from here? The debate on 
climate neutrality has only just started.  

Important actors such as the United States, China 
and the EU have committed themselves to climate  

neutrality as a long?term goal. This year, we have 
discussed concrete ideas how to get there. This  

discussion will, of course, now continue in the 
coming years, and we need to increasingly focus  

on very specific policy decisions to take. We have 
already roughly scheduled the next Berlin energy  

transition dialogue for the end of March 2022. 
By that time, I hope that we will have largely  

overcome the horrible pandemic we are facing today 
and was often mentioned also in the conference.  

In lieu of the tragic human, economic and social 
and cultural consequences of the pandemic,  

there are important lessons to be drawn 
from the future, many important lessons, but  

one lesson is that through digitalization, we 
are able to come together as an International  

Community and cooperate even closer than before. 
The BETD has been practicing this with an online  

campaign since May 2020 and, of course, this 
virtual conference we are participating in now  

closing. I expect also in the future the 
BETD will use the benefits of digitalization  

and combine them with the advantages of personal 
face?to?face encounters which are so much needed.  

Climate neutrality also has consequences for the 
symbolic ambassador of the BETD, the green sofa.  

In the past, the green sofa has travelled all 
continents to promote energy transition and the  

BETD. We used to compensate such travel. In the 
future, we do not only want to compensate, but  

avoid CO2 emissions. Therefore, the big green sofa 
will travel to only extraordinary events such as  

COP26. From now on, our new ambassador, I'll show 
it to you, will take over. In the coming year,  

the mini green sofa will facilitate in digital 
formats. It will bring the BETD to you at home and  

the mini green sofa will enable you, the global 
energy community, to take part and continue in the  

discussion about the global Energiewende. I'm 
very curious to see how that will work out. I  

hope it will work out well. Stay tuned and follow 
us on social media as well as the BETD website.  

We look forward to seeing you very soon. Be it 
online are in person for BETD 2022. Thank you.


