And, ladies and gentlemen, that does bring our final panel to an end, and we go straight away now into a wrap-up dialogue

with a leading German policymaker who is helping shape this country's own hydrogen strategy, which was announced last June with great fanfare, 

 and which is aiming to make Germany a world leader in hydrogen technology. So it's my pleasure

to welcome the State Secretary in Germany's Federal Ministry for economic affairs, Andreas Feicht.

Thank you very much. The German government adopted the national hydrogen strategy nine months ago. 

Since then, important measures have been implemented both nationally and internationally. 

Now we are looking forward to seeing investment projects as soon as possible.

From the investor's point of view, these investment decisions require the overall framework of funding,

regulation and infrastructure planning is perfectly coordinated. This is something at the heart of our hydrogen strategy.

 Mostly see isolated projects, for example, in hydrogen production 

 in the market ramp up phase. This is why we need integrated projects in which production 

usage and infrastructure are implemented together.

For this to work, a close cooperation between our stakeholders is crucial.  

We are committed to do this not only nationally, but also bilaterally and multilaterally.

Let me give you a short recap of the latest developments here in Germany.

We've recently adopted the national implementation of the EU renewable energy directive in the transport sector. 

The regulation lays down ambitious targets for the use of renewable energies in transport. 

We have created market incentives to help with the speedy ramp up, especially the use of green hydrogen in refineries.

In addition, incentives are in place for synthetic fuels and kerosene. 

The relevant regulatory framework also includes a burden of levies and electricity which affect the economics of electroilizers. 

To accept from the Renewable Energy Act, production has significantly improved.

Germany is pushing for full exemption for green hydrogen. 

Green hydrogen for us means conditions under which use of good electricity 

can be considered 100% green. We have submitted draft legislation

 to parliament which will create a robust legal framework 

to rapidly and legally secure development in infrastructure 

for investment projects in the first few years.

The amendment included other things. Procedural conversion of the existing natural gas pipelines. 

Third?party access as well as basic principles 

of planning and licensing law. When it comes to grounds to hydrogen project, 

an integrated approach is important. Nothing is achieve.

 If green hydrogen produced, electroilizers cannot be transported and purchased 

Funding mechanisms therefor must address production costs and as well costs on the demand side. 

We believe operations on the ground or similar measures are probably needed. 

Important projects of common European interests, 

on hydrogen is another key instrument for promoting entire hydrogen ?? chain. 

It's a special framework to support the European market. 

Germany takes on a coordinating  role in this issue.

Recently conclude the expression of interest procedure

 met with very great interest. Over 200 project proposals achieved to us.

I would like to take the opportunity to address the EU commission.

in the process of developing a new market. We have to face global competition.

Therefore, a special mechanism for example a state ?? proceedings

are needed to make go beyond the current status in terms of  funding level and intensity

our domestic capacity to produce green hydrogen in Germany is limited of course

We are aiming at important large amount of green hydrogen in the future

We are setting up partnerships with countries that have high potential to produce green hydrogen at very low cost.

We plan to fund demonstrating projects abroad that showcase that hydrogen technology made in Germany.

We will soon published funding tools for international projects

We have already provided funding to some very early projects in Chile and Saudi Arabia.

We are in the process called H2Global. 

That will support international market ramp up of green hydrogen

An auction-based mechanism with long-term hydrogen purchase agreements

that enables the import of green hydrogen to Germany and incentivizes significant additional private investment. 

Our long-term goal is to ramp up global hydrogen supply in order to increase the supply for Germany. 

In that case, I'm very happy to have you here and to discuss with you all these very important topics on hydrogen. 

Thank you very much for listening.

And thank you very much, State Secretary Feicht.

I'll just field a couple of questions to you, if I may.

 And, first of all, we were just talking about it in our last panel, how we accelerate progress on green hydrogen. Because, 

of course, the IAEA has said there are many sectors where there is a potential for use, but 

very, very little penetration so far. 

So what would you say to that? How do we get momentum going? 

Everyone needs a comprehensive strategy. 

All those countries of course, because that brings trust and confidence in the industry.

For the demand side and also for the supplier side. That's the first place. We did it in June last year, 

but also the European Union did it and a lot of other countries also. 

Second, we need certainty for the industry, so a clear legal framework 

when it comes to questions like, what is on the OPEC side, for example. In Germany, 

we've got higher electricity prices in order to produce green hydrogen and electroilizers.

 

Bring hydrogen into a ?? 

and bringing in a framework ?? an enabled framework for infrastructure. 

So, infrastructure is very crucial. People want to see that they are ?? they can ?? 

they can use hydrogen in a certain way. Safety, but also security of supply. 

And third, we need a clear ramp up, scale up, because the goal must be 

that are ?? that hydrogen will become a commodity like it is a natural gas in these days. 

So, scaling up by tailor made funding systems, for example,

 is the third pillar, I would say. 

Meaning ?? subsidies. This was also made by a member of our panel that basically

subsidies are crucial in the early phases.

How do you design those, and 

would look back to the introduction of solar as a model for that? 

Yes. When you go back 10 years, solar was very very expensive. 

And now solar is too cheap to measure some people say

but this is also what we have to achieve in the hydrogen sector.

What are the challenge to design those subsidies. 

The challenge is that on the hydrogen sector it's a pool effect, so we need

also to look at all the demand sectors. the facts. When you look on the steel industries for example

 or the chemical industries or mobility or the heating sector. 

So all of these sectors need tailor made funding systems. Sometimes 

on the regulatory side. Sometimes on the funding when it comes to ?? 

 

also, when it comes to CFDs on the OPEC side

It's not one fits it all. It's not a silver bullet. We have to look at all

these sectors and make it tailor made.

Talk to us a little bit about standards. This is something we discussed at length on the panel. 

As we all know, green hydrogen is only green if it is made with certifiably green power. 

So, who needs to drive standards forward and how can we 

be assured that we have the right standards in place, both in terms of origin, but also safety.

This is a question issue of policymakers. They have to define

those standards. And it is easy when the windmill is standing just beside

the electrolizer. Then it's easy. But the complicated case 

is when the electricity comes from all over the grid. What we are doing in Germany right now is 

to define those standards. We want to propose by this summer 

so we can really define precisely what green electricity is about and 

what does it mean for the hydrogen production. 

But this is a classic challenge and also job for the European Commission for the European Union. 

So mature markets, it's important that people can rely on those standards. 

By the end of the day, we want that hydrogen is a commodity because everybody can buy it,

and doesn't have to think about what is the hydrogen about? Which is coming ?? fabrication for example. 

So, those standards are very important.

And we had an audience question we didn't get to pose, so I'm going to pose it in you. 

In terms of what industrial sectors you see really driving this and 

having great potential for use of hydrogen. Where do you think we're going to see it taken up 

most rapidly and most extensively? And are there any surprises there?

There were some surprises. What I'm learning now is that a lot of sectors want to enjoy hydrogen

In the first decade is still rare and expensive. You need to bring it to a ?? sector. 

Also, where the gap to the economics is not too high. And that means that steel, for example, is very attractive. Also chemical industries. 

In the mobility sector, long?haul vehicles, the heavy vehicles, aircraft. So the airplanes from my point of view in the first place. 

Germany has quite an intensive debate in the question of the heating sector. So the heating sector, the gas sector

wants also to get this hydrogen blended in the gas grids and I'm open to that.  It's quite reasonable. 

We need to wait until the hydrogen is there in big amount and lower cost. 

You mentioned in your remarks at the outset, the IPCEIs the Important Projects of European Interests.

I had a chance to participate in a very big conference on the battery IPCEI that The Ministry has been very actively supporting. 

Talk to us a little bit about cooperation in hydrogen economy going forward and how you see the role of collaboration in international R&D.

Whenever I've got two types of cooperation, I might say. In the first place, those hydrogen projects would be integrated projects. 

So, where it's on site, also the transport capacity is on site and the usage of hydrogen is on site.

These are different industries that are cooperating. Businesses are cooperating with each other. 

And this is what the IPCEIs are about. So, we've got over 200 proposals from industries, quite overwhelming. 

And these are refineries, steel industry, but also energy companies, they are working together and cooperating. 

Second type is, of course, countries bilaterally, multilaterally because hydrogen is driven globally. 

It's not locally, regionally. You see it on the panel. It's globally driven and it's a question of import and export. 

We as Germany will be energy importers. What we want to do is export technology and import energy. 

This is about those cooperations. In the first place in Europe. Second place also internationally. 

And therefore working together, learning from each other is quite crucial.

We wouldn't be talking about all of this if Germany hadn't made an astonishing journey on renewables,

 a journey most people thought would not have been possible for a country in cold, cloudy northern Europe, 

but, in fact, Germany has an astonishing success there, and that is directly related, as we have heard also on our panel, to the potential for hydrogen economy. 

Where do you think Germany is going to be on hydrogen, say, in that crucial year 2030? I know you have big ambitions. Speak them out.

I want to have 5 gigawatts capacity in 2030, another 5 gigawatts in 2035. 

So this should be quite a big amount of capacity, but it won't be enough. 

So we will import ?? of course we will import hydrogen. And so from my point of view, 

more important than the capacity of our own is the demand side. So I want to see Germany in a leading position in order 

to event and also install and innovate on usage of hydrogen in all these different sectors. 

Which would enable our industry also to export this technology to other sectors and regions worldwide.

Thank you very much State Secretary Andreas Feicht for this very upbeat look at where the hydrogen economy is going in the future.


