Ladies and gentlemen, the success of Europe's 
energy transition will do nothing less than  

decide the Continent's future place on 
the geopolitical map. As President of the  

European Union Commission, our next speaker has 
pledged to make Europe the first climate neutral  

continent in the world. And committed to 
significantly higher emission reduction goals  

for 2030. It goes without saying that the energy 
sector must play an absolutely central role in  

meeting these and renewables in particular are 
identified as a priority for the post pandemic  

economic recovery fund next generation EU.
Let us hear more now from EU Commission President,  

Ursula von der Leyen. A warm welcome.
Dr. Ursula von der Leyen:  

Thank you very much, Melinda Crane, Minister  

Maas and Minister Altmaier.
Speaking about as you said,  

the future of industry. Just look, for example, to 
Sweden. They are 160 kilometers below the arctic  

circle. One can visit a pioneer of greening 
our economy. In the time, a steel plant just  

started using hydrogen gas to reduce iron ore. And 
another producer in the same region announced that  

he will build a large scale wind hydrogen plant 
as part of the new steel production facility.
 

These are not isolated cases. We all know 
that today the steel industry is responsible  

for up to 9% of global emissions. Nine%. And 
that's companies in Northern Sweden have to  

and want to bring down their carbon footprint 
to zero. With water vapor the only byproduct.  

Their way to achieve this is clean hydrogen. 
Hydrogen derived from renewable energy  

such as hydroelectric power. A source that is as 
abundant in Scandinavia as high quality iron ore.  

And these Swedish entrepreneurs match exactly the 
spirit of our European green new deal. We want to  

scale the way that we do business    reconcile the 
way we do business with the health of the planet.  

Let's do this. Because what is good for the planet 
is good for the business and good for us all.
 

The energy transition is at the heart of 
our European Green New Deal. This is why  

I'm excited to be able to talk to you today at 
the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue. Sadly,  

because of the pandemic, only virtually. Let 
me be clear. The European Green Deal is as  

important today as it has been before COVID 19. 
If anything, it has become even more important.  

There is increasing evidence that the loss of 
biodiversity is one of the root causes for this  

global pandemic. And while much of the world's 
activity froze during lockdowns and shutdowns,  

our planet continued to get hotter. And 
we see it all around us. From the collapse  

of the glacier in Northern India which just 
recently killed dozens of people, to the many,  

many crops destroyed in many European countries 
by the severe droughts of the last years.
 

Climate change is the massive 
crisis beyond COVID 19.  

And therefore, after the pandemic, 
there can be no backsliding, no return  

to economic activity based on fossil fuels 
at the expense of climate and nature.  

A bit more than a year ago    by 2030. The first 
ever European climate war will hopefully soon  

come into force. And all of this is part of our 
commitment to deliver on the Paris Agreement.  

And this is something that the business community 
has asked us to do for many years. Clear,  

transparent, and targets. So, that the 
companies have the certainty they need  

to plan ahead for the future. To turn their 
investments into green investments. Because in  

our fight against climate change, business 
is our close and indispensable partner.
 

Our European Green Deal is our strategy for 
sustainable growth. And now it is also our roadmap  

out of the crisis. One third of the investments 
from our recovery plan Next generation EU  

will set out the goals in the EU Green New 
Deal. And together with the budget, investing  

1.8 trillion Euro. One .8 trillion. This will 
be massive investments to build forward better  

and more sustainable. Next generation 
EU is an opportunity to boost  

our energy transition? And let me give you two 
examples. The first one. With next generation EU,  

we want to start the next generation wave. 
The main objective is to make our buildings  

more energy efficient. Buildings notably 
account for 40% of our emissions. Forty%.
 

So, by refurbishing and refitting them, we 
can improve their energy performance. We  

cut emissions. And at the same time, we reduce our 
energy bills. And in addition, our renovation wave  

brings a much needed boost to our construction 
sector and new jobs to our communities.  

Second, this next generation EU, we will 
invest in clean hydrogen as never before.
 

Clean hydrogen is a perfect means towards our 
goal of climate neutrality? I just gave you the  

examples from Northern Sweden. But also, from 
Germany and other countries, numerous regions  

can benefit from hydrogen. Just 
think of the so called rogebeat.  

Clean hydrogen can propel heavy industries. 
Propel our cars or trucks or planes.  

Store up seasonal heat and energy in our homes. 
And all of this with almost zero emissions.  

For the steel industry, hydrogen is the 
opportunity on their way to more sustainability.  

Steel is everywhere. We know it. Cars, bridges, 
buildings, washing machines. You name it. We need  

steel. But we want it to be sustainable.
Clean hydrogen is the way to go. And to help  

with this transition, last year we came up with 
a roadmap towards a hydrogen ecosystem in Europe.  

Like with our European Green Deal, we set clear 
targets. We want to have annual production  

capacity for renewable hydrogen of 1 million 
tons by 2024. And 10 million tons by 2030.
 

And by 2050, we want renewable hydrogen 
technologies to be deployed at large scale  

to reach all hard to decarbonize sectors in our 
economy. These are ambition goals, but they are  

realistic too. To get there, we have to start now. 
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55%  

towards the end of the decade, we have to act 
today. Because 2030 is just around the corner.  

And this is why by this summer, we will revise 
our entire climate and energy legislation  

to make it fit for 55. And let me give you a 
short preview of what we will be proposing.
 

First, we will enhance the EU emission trading 
system. We will extend it to the maritime sector.  

And we will better apply it to aviation.  

We are looking to introduce emission trading 
for buildings and for road transport.  

Carbon must have its price. Because 
nature cannot pay the price anymore.  

Second, we will come forward with proposals 
to boost renewable energy and improve energy  

efficiency. For example, we will propose measures 
to increase the energy efficiency of appliances  

from cleaners to smartphones. You name it. We will 
also invest in electric charging infrastructure  

and battery technology to help the car industry on 
its way towards electricity. That's the future.
 

This is also what consumers want. The 
sales of electric cars doubled last year.  

Reaching almost 10% of car sales in 
Europe. And there's more to come.  

Finally, we want to take green 
financing to the next level.  

Because to achieve our 2030 goal, we need to boost 
green investment. We will need to invest about  

330 billion US more in the coming year in 
the energy system to make it sustainable.  

Our European Union Green Standard, for example, 
and the EU taxonomy will lead the way. It will  

bring much needed clarity in what accounts 
for sustainable, eco friendly activities.  

Because we know how important this is 
for investors who are looking for truly  

sustainable projects. They don't want green 
washing. They want truly sustainable projects.
 

Again, our targets are 
ambitious, but we can reach them.  

And we need others to reach our ambition. From 
South Korea to Japan to South Africa to China.  

Of course, we want to make sure that they live 
up to their commitments. So, not only on paper,  

but on the ground. And we stand ready to help 
our partners on their way forward. And I must  

say that we're really excited that President 
Biden rejoined the Paris Agreement on his  

very first day in office. I also commend Joe 
Biden for his plan to convene a leaders summit  

for Earth Day. Because now is the time for action.  

Europe is world leader when it comes 
to innovation of green technologies.  

We stand with the leadership for climate 
change with our partners. A shared commitment  

to a net zero emissions pathway by 2050. We will 
make climate neutrality a new global benchmark.  

And that will be a powerful message in the 
run up to the next UN climate change conference.
 

And finally, we also need a 
Paris style agreement for biodiversity.  

Let us be very clear that, for example, 
when we lose forests, we don't just  

lose green space and natural habitat. We lose 
a key ally in our fight against climate change.  

And this is why the European Union will soon 
present a legal framework for the restoration of  

healthy ecosystems. It is why we will protect at 
least 30% of land and sea in the European Union.  

And we are ready to broker the same at 
the level at the next biodiversity summit.  

Because this will have, like 21 was for climate.
The path to a carbon neutrality offers great  

opportunities for innovation, 
growth and sustainable jobs.  

European companies know this. They bet on the 
opportunities offered by clean technologies  

at an early stage. And their 
pioneering spirit is now paying off.
 

But let us make no mistake. If we want our 
companies to continue on their way to zero  

emissions, we must insist on fairness and the 
level playing field for them. Let me for the last  

time return to the example of steel. One of 
the most traded commodities internationally.  

We need European companies to heavily invest 
in expensive technologies to make steel green.  

Green steel costs around 100 Euro more per ton 
than traditionally carbon heavy use steel. So,  

clearly, we have to prevent cheap products 
from abroad from undermining our efforts.  

And this is why this year we will present a carbon 
border adjustment mechanism. With this mechanism,  

we will have a CO2 charge on certain products 
entering the European Union. We worked so hard  

to reduce our emissions, thus we can't expect to 
import at the same time emissions from abroad.  

And the carbon border adjustment mechanism 
should motivate producers, but also EU importers,  

to also reduce their carbon emissions.
This would be our preferred solution.  

Ladies and gentlemen, from hydrogen valleys to 
climate friendly buildings, from green steel to  

zero emission cars. Our European Green New 
Deal will affect every aspect of our lives.  

It will make our lives better. Because as we 
have seen, our European Green New Deal is much  

more than cutting emissions. It is about making 
systemic modernization across our economy, society  

and industry. It is about building a better world 
to live in. So, let's work on this together.  

You can count on me and I know that I can count on 
you. And thank you very much for the attention.


