People and states put their hopes in a green 
recovery to both achieve their climate targets  

and overcome the economic downturn brought on by 
the COVID?19 pandemic. But also in the longer run,  

a structural change towards a greener and 
more sustainable economic system is needed  

in order to ensure both adequate living conditions 
for life on earth and economic prosperity. But how  

can we get there?

Ladies and gentlemen, without further ado, I 
will move straight to introduce our panel, and,  

again, I'll keep the introductions short and I 
will request to all speakers that you also please  

keep your responses to our questions 
short. Meaning under three minutes,  

please, because we have only half an hour 
for this very important subject that we  

want to talk about. It's a pleasure to welcome 
Yuriy Vitrenko. He is Acting Minister of Energy  

for Ukraine and former Executive Director of the 
company Naftogaz. Great to have you with us. Also  

will be joining us ?? well, we'll come back. Maybe 
he'll join us imminently. It's also a measure to  

welcome Jane McDonald, Executive Vice President of 
Canada's International Institute for Sustainable  

Development and also former Policy Director 
for the Canadian Ministry of Environment and  

Climate Change. We are working to getting our 
connection to Argentina's Secretary of Energy,  

Dario Martinez. I'm hoping that he will be with 
us shortly, but because of our short timeframe,  

I'm just going to move right ahead with a first 
round of questions. And as you know, our topic is  

green structural change and how we make it happen, 
and Yuriy Vitrenko, if I may begin with you,  

like many countries worldwide, you saw GDP in 
Ukraine shrink significantly since the pandemic.  

However, we've heard again and again here at the 
conference that there are opportunities in this  

crisis, so I wonder how you see it as Energy 
Minister of a gas producing country. What  

opportunities lie in the post-COVID-19 recovery 
for a green transformation of your energy system? 

I would also mention, first 
and foremost, new jobs and the growth.  

We currently estimate that we can get as much as 
500,000 new jobs because of this green transition.  

And I need to mention some 
particular opportunities.  

I will start with energy efficiency. Because 
energy efficiency sector, first of all, is rather  

labor intensive, and Ukraine, unfortunately, 
is not very energy efficient. So there is a  

great potential for Ukraine to do this energy 
efficiency, and basically it means that we will  

use less energy, especially less not green energy. 
I would also mention that we see a huge potential  

in Ukraine with a hydrogen economy. It's a new 
field in Europe. It's very promising. Ukraine  

has a well-developed transmission system that can 
be used to transport hydrogen ?? green hydrogen  

to Europe, in particular to Germany, and we see 
a lot of interest from our German partners. For  

example, for this green hydrogen coming from 
Ukraine. And this whole economy, it's not just  

basically the energy sector, there is a whole 
economy around the use of hydrogen in the world.  

I would also mention that Ukraine has a huge 
potential that we're currently using but we  

plan to keep using its potential to develop 
more solar and wind. Ukraine is the biggest  

area wise country in Europe, so we have a lot 
of land for solar plants and for wind farms.  

We estimate that we can produce from solar and 
wind two times more than our whole energy sector  

at the moment. It means that we can export a lot 
of green energy as a form of electricity or green  

hydrogen to Europe. And that's, of course, would 
be a huge help for Ukraine as a developing economy  

to get some sustainable revenue 
streams, and especially, again,  

based on some market integration with Europe, 
our strategic partner, because as you know,  

we are currently at war with Russia. So for 
us, it's not just important to have economic  

growth, but to have economic growth with 
partners that we can rely on like Europe,  

like the US, like the civilized world.
And, in fact, I want to come back  

to the role international cooperation can play in 
supporting you in achieving those aims, but first  

let me go to Dario Martinez and say a very warm 
welcome to you, sir, Secretary of Energy, former  

head of Argentina's Fuels and Energy Commission. 
If you would, speak to the same question that  

I just put, and I'm not quite sure whether you 
did hear it, so I will just pose it once again.  

The green recovery, building back after COVID, 
what do you see for Argentina as opportunities  

to move the green energy transition 
forward in the context of recovery?

 

Thank you very much.

 

Thank you very much. Yes. We believe that the energy transition needs to take place 

both in our economic economy and international level.

Both in the economy but also in the welfare field and the pandemic has made us reflect how important that 

is but also how important the overall health of the planet is. 

 And following the pandemic, we have the chance to progress. We can ??

we need international cooperation. We need multilateralism. And the key will be how we can work better together.

And we have analyzed the conditions in which of our population is living. The industrial countries have done it. 

 

And I believe that theagreement on achieving climate neutrality by the middle of the century

we need to transform our energy system, we need industry, researchers, civil society.

 All of these stakeholders need to create a new framework so that the energy transition

can bring us into a clean energy system. And politicians need to set the policy framework for this change.

 In conforming with the global targets, we need to act in solidarity internationally

so that we can come up with this new system. We need to progress with clear ideas and not forget that

each region, each country has different circumstances.

 

The effects on the economy have to be positive. Not only for the economy,

but also for the environment as well as the society.

So it's important to reduce poverty, to improve health, to improve education,

to improve gender equality, and, of course, to improve the environmental situation.

Energy must be available, it must not be damaging to the climate, so

we want to rebuild, and climate change is a reality which is already having consequences,

therefore we need to act now. The pandemic has put us in a position in which we have understood globally

that we can set targets and achieve targets, achieve goals, just as we have done in the pandemic.

Because if we don't work together, we will not be able to tackle the problem.

So, we need to assume this unique responsibility and make sure that 

there will be a better world which can stand on a sound basis of sustainability and inclusivity.

Muchas gracias. Let me move on to Jane McDonald. 
Let me ask you, this is a policy best practices  

that we do here at BETD. So I'd like to ask 
you, in your view, taking into account both the  

pandemic and the agency, as Michael Mann reminded 
us, of the climate change reality, what are the  

best solutions for stimulating green economic 
growth? And I'll just tell you that, of course,  

at every BETD, we do discuss the issue of carbon 
pricing, and we agree every year that we're not  

yet where we need to be with that tool. So, 
if you want to mention that one, that's fine,  

but maybe you can mention a few others as well. 

Thank you so much and thank you for inviting me. 
Wonderful to be here. I think the good news for  

this conversation is that the topic of a green 
recovery and building back better has stayed at  

the top of the political agenda over the last 
year. In 2010, you'll remember that we missed  

the opportunity in our rush to reboot economic 
growth following the 2008?2009 financial crisis.  

We succeeded in getting people back to work, but 
we did so on the back of an historic increase  

in climate pollution, and that is not the 
case now. Over the past year, countries all  

around the globe have announced the first big 
pieces of big green economic recovery packages.  

And they're doing that because I think there is a 
general acknowledgement now that the good news is  

that it's going to take a lot of work and jobs to 
reset the energy infrastructure of our economies.  

And multiple studies have been done to look at 
what types of investments would also help advance  

our response to climate change. You'll recall 
even a year ago an Oxford study that came out  

that included leading economists like Nicholas 
Stern and is it analyze possible COVID?19 economic  

recovery packages. And their work showed that 
the green projects create more jobs, deliver  

high short?term returns per dollar spent and lead 
to increased long?term cost savings compared with  

traditional fiscal stimulus. And here in Canada, 
I shared a similar task force that put together  

recommendations for government on a package in the 
billions that would help build the infrastructure  

and healing capacity we know we're going to need 
to meet our 2050 climate commitments. And across  

all of these studies, the great news is that there 
was remarkable consensus on what to move on first.  

One, invest in ?? and I think we've touched 
on some of this already in these two initial  

comments today. So, one, invest in efficiency. 
Retrofitting buildings to make them more  

efficient. There is a huge lift to do across 
most countries on that front, and that is  

a jobs opportunity. Number two, jump start 
the production and adoption of zero?emission  

vehicles, including all the needed 
infrastructure that goes along with that.  

Number three, growing clean energy sectors. This 
ranges from new electricity grids, investments  

in renewable energy production, and all of 
these are shown to create in the short term,  

these are pretty labor?intensive things that 
create jobs. Research shows twice as many jobs  

per dollar as fossil fuel investments. I'd say 
the last investment that comes up consistently  

over the last analysis of the last year or 
so, is that putting people to work restoring  

and conserving our natural infrastructure 
like wetlands, coastal marshes, forests  

can really increase our resiliency and, again, 
provide big employment opportunities. And as  

you've heard, you know, there are multiple 
proposals on the table in the US right now  

to create a new civilian conservation or climate 
corps. Putting people to work planting trees,  

restoring public lands and waters and training 
them for environmentally?friendly careers. So  

I think we're seeing a lot of consensus right now 
in terms of what types of investments could really  

give us the environmental and economic payback 
that we all are looking for at the moment. And  

there is actually a huge opportunity here to 
put a lot of people to work and train them  

for what are the growth industries of the future.
Thank you very much. And let me go back  

to Michael Mann now. In your closing section 
of your keynote, you made it very clear that  

the transformation has to be structural and that 
simply switching to soy milk and bike riding, as  

worthy as that may be, isn't going 
to get to us where we need to go. So,  

what do you see as how we can really drive that 
kind of level of structural change that's needed? 

Yeah, well, you know, and individual 
action is important. I don't want to leave people  

with the wrong impression. We should all do 
those things that we can do to minimize our  

carbon footprint. In many cases, that makes us 
healthier, it saves us money, makes us feel better  

about ourselves, it sets a good example for other 
people. We should do all those things, but without  

structural change, without policies, we're not 
going to see the sort of decarbonization, the rate  

and magnitude of decarbonization that we need. 
We need to bring global carbon emissions down  

by a factor of 2 within ten years if we are 
to remain on a path to limiting warming below  

that very dangerous 1.5 degrees Celsius. So, you 
know, it's not a mystery as to how we do that,  

economists, sociologists, political scientists, 
we know that we need incentives for people to  

make the right choices. Some people will engage 
in carbon?friendly consumer actions and activities  

simply because they know it's the right thing 
to do. But many people won't. They have to elect  

to make the right decisions, and the way that we 
get them to do that is to provide incentives for  

them to do so. So, we have to level the playing 
field in the energy marketplace, right? For too  

long we've been providing subsidies to fossil fuel 
infrastructure and not providing similar levels of  

support for renewable energy. That's a perversion 
of the incentive structure. We need the opposite.  

We need to incorporate, we need a price signal 
that communicates the damage that carbon pollution  

is doing. And that price signal in the economy 
so that consumers are led to make climate and  

carbon?friendly choices, and that can be done 
through carbon pricing, and there are various ways  

of doing carbon pricing. Some of the critics from 
sort of the left ?? from the progressive side of  

the conversation increasingly have been critical 
of carbon pricing because they think that it will  

lead to undue impact, it will fall mostly on lower 
income front line communities. It doesn't have to  

be that way. In Canada, in Australia before the 
incoming conservative government got rid of it,  

carbon pricing was working and it was actually ?? 
it was actually playing out in a progressive way.  

Lower income earners were actually benefitting. 
So, it all depends on what you do with the  

revenue. Carbon pricing can be done in a way 
that is consistent with a just transition,  

but it's just one of the tools in the toolbox. We 
need subsidies and stimulus for renewable energy.  

Those are all sort of demand?side measures. 
Supply?side measures, we've got to stop government  

funding of new fossil fuel infrastructure. We've 
got to stop the, you know, allowing fossil fuel  

companies to use public lands to expand pipelines 
and other infrastructure. And the good news,  

as we've already heard, is that the Biden 
administration really is incorporating that  

sort of thinking across all of their actions. 
Every agency, every division of the government,  

climate change is now part of the decision?making 
across our government. And that really is the  

difference. We haven't seen something like that 
before. That's part of why I'm so optimistic  

that with the leadership we're now seeing by 
the United States returning to the world stage  

and demonstrating we're doing our due diligence, 
that's gonna bring other actors together, that's  

gonna help us see the global action that we need
Thank you very much. And, in fact,  

we heard some very powerful messages here from 
both the ?? the UK Minister and from Patricio  

Espinoza of the UN talking about that fossil 
fuels will be in the limelight in Glasgow in  

November. Let me go to a second round of 
questions now, again, with the request for very  

brief responses. We have only about 14 minutes 
left on the clock at this point, dear speakers.  

So I'll go first again to Minister Vitrenko 
and ask you about the role of international  

cooperation, especially international investors 
because you mentioned the private sector. What  

are you priorities for leveraging that kind of 
cooperation? What are they looking for from you  

and how can we work with them?

We've seen some explosive growth 
of private investments into solar  

energy?generating capacities. Again, 
frankly, it's because of the other  

tariff that we have in Ukraine. So it's not 
purely market based. But now we need to compliment  

this solar capacity with some energy 
storage so that we can start phasing out our  

coal?generating capacities. And for that 
purpose, of course, we would like private  

investments. As I mentioned, we have a huge 
potential for renewables and energy storage  

is just the best compliment for the development 
of renewables. Second, I would say it may sound  

not 100% politically correct, at least to 
some, but Ukraine is also big in nuclear  

generation, in nuclear power plants, and 
here we need to make our existing capacities  

more efficient and modernize them so that, 
again, it's safe and it's efficient, and, again,  

it helps phasing out coal from the energy mix. 
And here we are working with, for example,  

the company Vesting House. We're replacing our 
investment with this company with some facilities  

in Sweden. So we do hope that this will continue 
successfully. On top of it, I would mention that  

we would welcome and we need huge investments in 
energy efficiency, distribution networks, again,  

to increase the efficiency. Smart meters, smart 
grids, smart everything, because it's another  

side of the equation. The smarter we consume the 
energy we have, the less energy we need. So it  

also helps the world. It helps to fight climate 
change. And the last but not least, of course, we  

would welcome more investments in the generation 
sector, in renewables, both solar and wind,  

and even biofuels. Of course, basically it's 
not completely carbon neutral, but with modern  

technology, it's at least more efficient and 
it's renewable. So, these four priorities  

are most welcome for foreign investors 
to come and to invest. We fully support  

these investments because we believe it 
will be in the best interests of everybody 

Thank you very much, Minister. Let me 
move straight on to Secretary Martinez, also with  

the question about international cooperation. It's 
a main theme here at the Berlin Energy Transition  

Dialogue, that this has to be a global and 
cooperative effort. So, very briefly, if you  

would, the two or three most important points for 
Argentina in terms of international cooperation.

  

Well, for a developing country like Argentina, international cooperation is, of course, the key, really.

It's so important for us to work together with the International Community to help us bring,

bring our change more quickly and dynamically, and, of course,

we don't want to leave anybody behind. In Argentina, we believe that energy ?? the energy transition

 

must cover all sustainable energy sources. 

 

And particularly we have a lot of history with fuels and we have a lot of fuel history with 

hydro power and also nuclear. And we have a lot of history with renewables.

The list is expanding and we need to support our natural resources and we need to have these resources use sustainably

because we have International commitment  to help combat climate change, and I will say that our country, geographic diversity has the possibility

to develop various energy systems. And all of these energy sources need to become part of the energy 

transition so it's better for the environment. And, of course, we also need to promote these resources, to fund these resources. 

Our Ministry has always taken part in these cooperative initiatives and has always

endeavored to share experience. I think that's very important in order to achieve our targets that we learn from each other, 

and we're working on hydrogen, for example.

In particular, with the international banks, we need support, need financial support so that 

 

we can really get the funding we need to drive forward the energy transition. Thank you.

Thank you very much. And, in fact, that was a point that was repeated. Indeed finance is going to be crucial and cooperation as well. So, thank you for that.

So, what would you tell both the UK 
as COP26 host and also the UNFCCCC  

as they get ready for the COP? How do we get 
movement on this? It's been a topic for years  

and years, and yet again, the action is too slow.
Yes, that's for sure. What Michael  

mentioned, what we're looking for and 
what fossil fuel subsidy reform is about  

is systemic change. We need a way to remove 
distortions from markets and artificial barriers  

to clean energy technologies so we're not stalling 
this transition. This is particularly important  

this year as we talk about ambition around the 
COP because the investments we need to be making  

in the clean energy sector have long lead times, 
and if we don't get on them now, we're going to  

miss the window for hitting our 2050 target. 
It is really critical. We talked a little bit  

about carbon pricing, too. Carbon pricing and 
fossil fuel subsidies really go hand?in?hand.  

One without the other will not be as effective as 
both of them in tandem will be. So, think of it  

as a boat with a leak that is taking on water. To 
fix the situation, you need to both fix the leak  

and bail out the water. Doing one but not the 
other doesn't ultimately solve our problem. This  

really matters because over the last year ISD has 
led something called the energy policy tracker.  

Check it out online. Tracking policies in the 
energy sector in response to the COVID pandemic.  

30% of investments can be classified as green. 
41% can be classified as fossil fuel support.  

So, while the recovery packages that 
are rolling out are the most green  

in history, we also have significant work to 
do to make sure public funds are being spent  

in ways that make sense. And I think what's 
really helping this conversation move forward  

is not just the cooperation that's been pushed 
in this topic for years with countries who are  

advanced in this space engaging other 
countries on this, but also the focus on  

pathways to Net Zero. Or you can really see, if 
you walk it back over the next couple of decades,  

what types of investments we need to be 
making now with the public funds that we have  

and how to crowd private sector investment into 
the spaces we need. Really needs to be singularly  

focused right now on the growth industries of 
the clean energy economy. And so I think that  

conversation is helping to kind of illustrate 
the levels of investment needed there and why we  

don't want to see public funds kind of working 
against each other in this critical moment. 

Thank you very much. And back to 
Michael Mann with one last question, if I may.  

And when we talk about fossil fuel subsidies, 
ultimately we're also talking about the fact that  

there are powerful interests that want to keep 
our energy systems the way that they are. And  

that was very clear in your presentation where you 
showed us the newest arguments that are being made  

for why we don't actually have to change. How 
do we ?? how do we beat that? Those interests  

have powerful political lobbies, of course, and 
they also have influential voices in many media,  

as we could see from some of the articles that 
you put up on the screen. What do you think?  

Is that shifting and how can we break that hold?
Yeah, thanks. You know, that is  

part of the problem. We have some very powerful 
opponents here when it comes to our efforts to  

address the climate crisis. That's the bad news. 
The good news is we have some very powerful allies  

as well. The insurance and reinsurance industries, 
of course, recognize the cost to them if we don't  

act on the climate crisis, but increasingly 
you see the finance and investment community  

beginning to move away from investments 
in new fossil fuel infrastructure.  

Black Rock Bank of England. Increasingly, some 
of these large investment firms and finance  

firms are saying these are bad investments. 
Fossil fuels are bad investments because  

the fossil fuel companies are going to need 
to leave most of their assets in the ground.  

Those are stranded assets. It's a bad long?term 
investment that's called transition risks, but  

there is also physical risk, the harm that's going 
to be done by climate change itself, and a lot of,  

you know, for example superannuation fund 
manages who have a fiduciary responsibility  

to their clients not to financially harm them 
increasingly see climate impacts in the broader  

scheme of fiduciary responsibility. If you have 
a responsibility to your client not to fund  

investments that are going to hurt your client, 
well, destroying the planet for your client  

and your clients' children and grandchildren is 
clearly doing harm. So increasingly, I do think  

you see that community start to embrace a broader 
notion of what fiduciary responsibility means.  

And to some extent, the real leadership now is 
coming from a place some people might not have  

expected it, from the world of finance, and I 
think with that ally, with those powerful allies,  

the wind at our backs with the favorable shift 
in political winds here in the United States,  

the renewed leadership by the United 
States, the Youth Climate Movement,  

all of these things coming together as we started 
off at the beginning of the session saying,  

this is our moment, this is our time, let's do it.
Thank you very much, and I'm so glad  

you mentioned the financial sector because, 
in fact, here in Europe, it's a topic that's  

come up not only as part of a fiduciary 
responsibility, but also bank supervision.  

We're hearing both the Bank For International 
Settlements and also the European Central  

Bank saying we need to put climate goals at the 
center of goals as well, so a very interesting  

conclusion to this discussion. Thank you 
so much to our panel for being with us for  

this essentially wrap-up session on how we can 
use the green recovery after the pandemic to  

drive the shift in energy systems, but also 
decarbonization as a whole. Many thanks.


