Now I would like to focus my attention 
on one country in particular that has  

a potential to become a driver of 
the energy transition in its region.  

Iraq is a geographically vast country with a 
wealth of natural resources both in terms of  

fossil fuels and regenerative sources, especially 
from the sun. With us to discuss his country's  

energy policy and plans for the future is 
his excellency Ihsan Abdul Jabbar Ismaael  

who heads Iraq's ministry of oil. Hello, welcome. 
Thank you so much for joining us this morning.
 

Yeah. Thank you. Thank you for making the 
time to participate in this very important  

talk. Iraq, as you said, is one 
of the    one of the important  

countries in the energy sector. Iraq is 
second exporter in the public. And one of the  

energy sector. And trying to stay with this 
level of participation in the energy market  

for Iraq. Internally in our care is many 
projects to developing the energy sector and  

developing its capacity for the deployment 
of the sustainable development in Iraq.
 

One of the most important visions Iraq tried to 
apply now is how we shift from the fossil energy  

fuel to renewable energy. And 
shifting of the Iraqi future  

sector is one of the biggest targets of the 
Iraqi government. And that we started with  

many investors and how we can reach our target.
We started with medium sized projects.  

We started in five areas in Iraq. 
With the sight on the middle of Iraq.  

We have designed    we have designed 
750 megawatt of solar energy.  

One area is    megawatt, one is 255, 
and the other area is 600 megawatt.  

Now we start the country with the bigger 
companies about going ahead with    going  

ahead with alternate power. And with Iraq, we 
arranged 20% of our need in 2030 for energy.  

Production capacity for the    for 2021 is around  

30 megawatt. And the capacity. And the 
current capacity is not more than 22 gigawatt.  

2030, I think that the peak of consumption 
in Iraq is around 40 gigawatt. And  

Iraq is one of the countries that is having the 
growth percentage in population year over year.
 

That is around 1 million new generation every 
year. Iraq now is close to being 40 million     

40 million in population. And we will reach in 
2030 around 50 million. So, the consumption in  

the community is not less than 1 gigawatt every 
year. So, for the coming years, we need to add  

10 gigawatt. We tried to make this 10 gigawatt 
from renewable energy and are focusing in this  

business. We are focusing to open the discussion 
with the biggest energy company and having a  

discussion to have us in this sector because 
it is available    [audio cutting out]   
 

This should go as one of our targets to have 
our support for the    of that. And we tried to  

optimize and to manage all the challenges in 
that way. Iraq has its share of sunshine in  

the space. And to the south and the rest of Iraq. 
And we tried to be balanced in fiscal terms.  

So, this is our vision in that. I have 
seen we are aware about this project.  

And now signed with Iraq in areas where we are 
connected to the World Bank. And I have seen.  

So, this is Iraq's position and shifting 
for new energy. And that was agreed by  

our team which is working on the carbon 
footprint teamwork. And that's it.  

So, where are we? And we are open to discuss 
any feedback from any institute. Or energy  

institution about work in Iraq. How can 
they have Iraq to the sector? But it's a  

challenge they find from the investor. 
And that's all I can say. Thank you.
 

Thank you very much, your excellency. 
Ihsan Abdul Jabbar Ismaael,  

the head of Iraq's ministry of oil asking for 
dialogue with the countries of the world.


