Dear Minister Schulze, let's stay with emission 
trading. Based on positive experience with the  

EU scheme, Germany has in fact itself introduced 
an additional national carbon pricing mechanism  

for the heat and transport sector. 
And I would be very curious to hear  

how that is being received. Especially 
by Germany's passionate car drivers.
 

Yes, indeed, it was not easy at all to introduce 
this system in Germany. When I started doing  

this, so, there was a lot of resistance. I 
was told I'm introducing a plan economy and  

reducing the economic ambitions. 
But it is not at all the case.  

I wanted to enhance climate friendliness. And what 
we did was we explained exactly that we started to  

introduce these    this price system very slowly 
so that everybody was able to adopt. Because you  

need to have an alternative.
If I reduce costs for  

train journeys and increase prices for flight 
journeys, then everybody needs to know that  

these prices will increase annually step by step. 
So, we have compensations for that. We  

have increased other costs so that everybody 
can afford these tickets. It cannot be possible  

that only an elite can afford these tickets. 
Everybody needs to be able to participate.  

Because energy transition is something that 
everybody needs to be able to contribute to.  

And I think we were able to achieve that.
Let me go back now to Minister Treveylan. You  

mentioned the energy transition council. 
Minister Schulze just talked about the need  

to make the transition inclusive and just. I 
wonder if you can tell us a little bit more  

about how you think that a coal phase out can 
be accompanied by a just transition. How do we  

not make this essentially burden those who are 
already perhaps in precarious social situations?
 

Such an important question. The powering past coal 
alliance has established a specific task force  

on just transition which draws on the expertise 
from partners such as the Just Transition Center,  

established by the ITUC. The energy transition 
council brings together the global, political,  

financial and technical leadership to accelerate 
the transition from coal to clean power.
 

Importantly, organizations such as 
the International Labor Organization  

and the multi lateral development banks are also 
on the council. And this council always paid  

particular attention to the social and financial 
challenges facing this energy transition. And  

looking toward its partners to create a package 
of support to fully consider just transition as  

part of the green economic recovery. Both in the 
pandemic and as we transition in the longer term.
 

Thank you very much. And back to Minister 
Schulze now with a two part question,  

as it were, on phase out. So, coal phase out and 
nuclear phase out. We had an audience question  

come in just now in regard to Minister Treveylan's 
statement that the COP26 presidency the UK will  

be looking to encourage countries to get out of 
coal by 2030. That, of course, is not the target  

date that has been set in Germany. But there are 
indications that the transformation, the phase  

out may actually be happening faster. So, how do 
you see that? And then I want to come to nuclear.
 

Yes, indeed, I think it will happen 
faster in Germany with the law.  

We always look at whether we would be able to do 
it fast we are coal electricity. Because we phase  

out of coal energy and nuclear energy. And we 
have to focus completely on renewable energies.  

And we have to take into account that some 
things take longer than expected. It has to  

happen faster, of course. The quicker we can use 
renewable energies, the faster we will be able to  

phase out coal energy systems. And 
this is the particularity about the  

COVID crisis. Traditionally we would have expected 
the prices to decrease. And it happened only for a  

short period of time. And then the price increased 
again by around 40 Euros. The economy saw that,  

and it will continue to be this way. So, it is 
worth investing into energy transitions. And many  

decided to focus on renewable energy.
Follow up question on nuclear and that  

phase out. Because, of course,  

there are critics who say, listen, if we're 
serious about the climate goals, we need  

to extend the nuclear phase out. But you indicated 
in your keynote, you don't see that as an option.
 

Indeed. We don't see any perspective 
for nuclear energy. Forty five%  

of energy came to Germany last year from 
renewable energy sources. And electricity  

from nuclear power stations, this is not our 
future. They're not flexible enough. They  

can be    they cannot compete with very 
efficient renewable energy sources. Nuclear  

energy is very expensive. When you look at 
our neighbor states, you will see how much  

their systems have changed. And there is no 
alternative for renewable energies. And also,  

nuclear power stations are not secure. 
Sometimes we still don't know what to do  

with the dismantlement of nuclear power stations. 
We have allocated in my industry 1 billion Euros  

to dismantle these old power stations. And why 
should we to want for such a pricey option?
 

Back to Minister Treveylan with a question about 
the role of the private sector. Because we've  

heard it again and again here at the Berlin Energy 
Transition Dialogue. The private sector must  

play a central role. Now, the UK is both a 
globally recognized leader in finance. And as  

COP26 President, has a COP26 finance campaign. 
So, what are you aiming to achieve there and  

how to work together with the private 
sector in this energy transition?
 

Thank you. And thank you for recognizing that this 
is such an important part of the COP26 framework.  

The goal of our finance campaign is firstly to 
raise the ambition of public and private finance  

to achieve the $100 billion goal which I mentioned 
earlier. And secondly, to shift the trillions in  

global markets to finance the transition to 
a net zero and resilient future. The energy  

transition's campaign is focused on accelerating 
the decarbonization of the power sector by  

phasing out coal, as we have been discussing. And 
improving the international offer of support to  

developing countries to ensure that clean power is 
the most attractive option for power generation.  

So, these campaigns are working very closely 
together to mobilize the infrastructure needed  

to phase up projects. And to work on the just 
transition as we discussed and to bring about an  

end to coal financing. We're working to strengthen 
the dialogue between governments and investors,  

particularly in emerging markets and developing 
countries, and ready to build the confidence  

in the policy and regulation that can bring 
down costs and draw in that greater finance.
 

And I would also if I may urge financial 
institutions to join the Race to Zero, one of the  

international campaigns running for the private 
sector. Setting robust net zero targets in  

their businesses and demonstrate how major 
investors will finance the green transition.
 

Thank you very much for that, Minister Treveylan. 
We have about one and a half minutes left in our  

session. And so, I don't want to let our Ministers 
go before I ask one more question about the EU  

and the COP, Minister Schulze. So, the EU has 
submitted the NTC, in this case, EU determined  

contribution for the future. How does it differ 
from the previous EU plan? Has the EU upped its  

game? Because we have been talking all through the 
BETD about our need to move faster and further.
 

Yes, indeed. We acted much faster on a European 
level because you have to think that during the  

pandemic when we had to deal with so many other 
issues, we decided during the pandemic that we  

will increase our goals from 40% to at least 
minus 55%. And this is a decisive step that we  

took with other heads of states and governments. 
We mean that we will anchor that in our own  

legal system. We described in detail how we want 
to update this goal. And I think that this was  

a big step forward. And that the EU   
Minister Svenja, thank you for your words.  

Many, many thanks to British Minister Anne Marie 
Treveylan for taking us through the    also the  

complexities of what you will be aiming for at 
the COP26. We wish you the very utmost success  

in your efforts. It has been very interesting 
to hear two powerful voices for the energy  

transition. Two powerful women policymakers 
exchanging views on this subject.


