Joining me live in The Hub is the Rolando 
Castro Cordoba here to speak with us about  

his country's track record. Thank you 
so much for being with us today. 
 

Thank you so much. It's a pleasure once again to 
be at this Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue. 
 

Costa Rica is already a front?runner 
when it comes to global renewable energy.  

With nearly 100% of the country's electricity 
needs being covered by hydro power, wind,  

solar energy. What did it take for Costa 
Rica to achieve this landmark in stability? 
 

Well, first of all, we have to say 
that this is not something recent.  

This achievement began 70 years ago 
or more. Perhaps the issues to include  

I think a clear vision of sustainability, and I 
think this is part of our identity as a country.  

And to maintain this vision in the long run, 
regardless of different political administrations.  

I think we're committed to use the natural 
resources we have instead of fossil fuels  

that we have to import. Also, for more than 30 
years, we have environment and energy under the  

same roof in our Ministry, and I think this also 
helps to consolidate a vision of renewable energy.  

Of course we have a lot of challenges, climate 
change and technological disruptions to name a few  

because our grid is based on large, 
centralized hydro?powered plants. So  

we need to keep diversifying our grid and 
other vectors such as green hydrogen. 
 

Thank you very much. Now, I know that the Costa 
Rican transport sector as well as heating account  

for the majority of your country's energy usage 
are still primarily fueled by fossil fuels.  

What plans are there to extend decarbonization 
strategies to these two sectors? 
 

Great question. This is one of our main challenges 
and at the core of our Decarbonization Plan  

2050 that was launched. It makes only sense 
to use this competitive advantage to electrify  

our transportation sector and our industry. It 
also makes economic sense as we have to import  

the fossil fuels that we use. So in order to 
do so, we have enacted policies and legislation  

to promote clean transportation, both electric 
and hydrogen?based cars. So we have incentives  

and charging stations that covers the whole 
territory and competitive tariffs to promote this  

transportation. As a result, it has been growing 
in spite of COVID?19, and so far Costa Rica is  

the country in Latin America with more electric 
cars, despite the size of its population. Also,  

we started with the help of the German government 
on electric buses in order to generate the data  

necessary for the transportation companies to 
learn about the advantages of this technology.  

In the western sector, we have been promoting 
utility companies to use competitive tariffs  

to promote this transportation. So far we have one 
utility company that has a decarbonization tariff,  

but we need to work harder in order to offer 
other value services for the industry to compete  

with fossil fuels that are cheap but dirty. 
Thank you very much, Vice Minister of Costa Rica.  

Now, let's hear about the renewable energy 
transition in another Latin American country,  

this time from Chile's Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Andres Allamand. 
 

Chile has driven itself to reach carbon neutrality 
by 2050. While my country is responsible for less  

than 3% of global CO2 emissions, climate change is 
imposing serious economic and a threat to humanity  

as a whole. This is a problem that will only 
be curbed if we face it as a global program,  

which demands a global solution in which each 
nation has the responsibility to make an effort  

to contribute. This explains why Chile's carbon 
neutrality plan is so ambitious. This strategy  

is aimed to achieve a clean energy that will 
be the base of a sustainable and new economic  

growth in the near future. The formula is already 
well known, to replace contamination fuels with  

renewable ones that in turn produce clean energy 
to move different sectors of the economy. Mining,  

industry, transportation. This ambitious plan, 
it is the massive renewable energy potential.  

Has the largest solar on the planet, which has 
driven low?cost solar development. Moreover,  

Chile has an enormous green energy potential 
placed in the southern part of the country,  

including Patagonia. These natural conditions in 
an emerging market puts Chile in the potential  

role of a very relevant player. This reflects in 
the fact that while local legislation is still  

in process, the number of products to produce 
green energy in Chile are increasing from 20  

in November 2020 to more than 40 projects in 
a study at this date. Rather critical factors  

supporting our national strategic green energy 
plan is a particularly strong but still flexible  

energy framework characterized by its neutrality, 
openness, and private investment friendliness,  

which has been recognized among other key actors 
by the International Energy Agency. All these  

combined factors, strong vision and political 
will model the framework for Chile's commitment  

are the main conditions that allows my country to 
be right now in the front line of a very necessary  

green revolution that will transform our world 
and our people's way of life in the next years.  

Come with us. We are ready to do our part.
That is Minister Andres Allamand of Chile.


