Welcome back to the Hub ladies and gentlemen. We 
just heard the panel financing the green recovery.  

It only makes sense we talk now 
to individuals from the green  

banking sector. I think up first I'd like to 
start with Bianca de Bruijn-van der Gaag. Hello  

and welcome. Ms Bruijn is the Head of Real 
Estate Financing for ING-DiBa. Thank you  

very much for joining us.
Thank you for having me. 

Well, the BETD, of course, is all about the energy 
transition. As a bank representative, how do you  

understand the role of banks and banking within 
the larger context of the energy transition? 

Well, if I look at my own company, ING, we are a 
global bank. We are active in over 40 countries  

and we have billions flowing through our books. 
And that means that we have a huge opportunity,  

but also a huge responsibility to try to make an 
impact for the better. And for us that's more than  

just mitigating harm. We try to bring aspects 
of fighting climate change into our dialogue  

with clients, and also in the financing decisions. 
We try to play a role when it comes to financing  

the change, sharing knowledge, really seeking 
this active dialogue with the clients and also  

using our innovation skills . And for us, being 
sustainable needs to be part of all the choices  

that we make as a lender, as a partner, and also 
all the services that we offer to our customers. 

Thank you very much. I just learned about your 
Terra Approach. Can you explain about the bank's  

main goals and its main sustainability approaches?
Yes, sure. And, actually, the idea is to try to  

go well below the Paris Agreement. What 
we've done since we started doing this  

is we've started measuring and really staring our 
loan book, and we financed quite some billions in  

energy projects, and that goes to wind firms, to 
solar energy, geonuclear power, production lines,  

bio?based plastics or wastewater treatments. 
And the interesting thing there is we really  

searched for an active dialogue and really 
try to work with our clients and also  

say to our clients that if their stability rate 
improves, the interest on their loan goes down. So  

that's, I think, a good way to tackle this. We've 
also been really clear on what we don't finance.  

We say no to certain companies or also to certain 
sectors. Example here is to introduce the exposure  

to coal?power generation. We want to be close to 0 
in 2025. We were the first bank to commit to this.  

Then there is a category I always call the 
"yes, but" category. We try to respond to  

these financing requests with "yes, but," 
and then we talk about the sustainability  

improvements that the client must make first. 
And our approach is always to have a dialogue  

and trying to support clients in improving their 
environmental and social impacts. Of course they  

are possible. And we really believe that this is 
more effective than excluding clients altogether. 

Thank you very much. I've got one more question 
for you. Since buildings and infrastructures are  

on the side of consumers, does your bank invest in 
green energy projects on an international level? 

Yes, we do. I don't think we should 
talk here about examples ?? by  

examples I mean client names, of course, but 
especially if you look at new energy technologies,  

we have started a center of excellence that looks 
into three main topics. That is battery storage,  

carbon capturing utilization and storage and 
also hydrogen. And what we want to do there is  

really be a knowledge center on these emerging 
technologies to look at advisory and also build  

more client awareness of the possibilities that 
are there. And the same that we do in sustainable  

housing, if it comes to private individuals 
that own and live in a house, I think there  

is still a long way to go because many people 
don't realize what the impact is of living in  

their house, and also not what they can do to 
improve it. And there are a lot of things that we  

can do as a bank, but we can't do them alone. So I 
think there is also the cooperation between banks,  

also the cooperation with governments is something 
that is going to help us in the next steps. 

Jennifer Porto: Thank you very much for joining 
me today. You've given us a lot to think about  

in terms of green banking and sustainability. I'd 
like to go to a video statement from Maria Netto  

from the Inter-American Development Bank.
With 7.4% contraction in 2020.  

To support the region, the inter?American 
Development Bank approved 21.6 billion in new  

financing. These measures have not only increased 
resilience in adaptive capacity to the crisis,  

but also laid the groundwork for sustainable 
and climate?smart recovery. They are working  

with the financial markets to help shift the 
trillions of private investments to low?carbon  

and carbon resilient pathways as part of COVID?19 
recovery. In close cooperation with the donor  

community, including the German government, our 
green finance strategy has an integral approach.  

We have been working with over 40 international 
development institutions to secure investments.  

We have secured over 30% of the local 
green and sustainable market in the region.  

We also have been promoting harmonization 
of the distribution of green financial  

markets through our green transparency platform. 
Further, we have been developing public?private  

innovation laboratories to assist governments 
to mainstream climate best practices and green  

finance in the local financial systems. We are 
poised to lead on the climate smart recovery.  

IDB has created the networks to bring the biggest 
players and innovative projects to the table,  

but we need your support to broaden the 
coalition of partners to scale up sustainable  

collaborate in the region. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Maria Netto.


