Joining me now is a member of the Member 
of the Executive Board of Siemens Energy.
 

Dr. Eickholt, welcome. it's such a pleasure 
to have you here with us live in our Hub. 
 

Thank you very much. 
The first question that  

I'd like to ask you is, of course, the frame of 
this year's BETD is decarbonization. Now, Siemens  

Energy may be new to the Stock Exchange, but it's 
an established company that has long had a focus  

on fossil fuel power generation, so what can you 
contribute to the topic of decarbonization? 
 

Well, I think quite a lot. Starting with we'd like 
to become carbon neutral in our own operations by  

2030 and make sure the electricity we use is going 
to be green by 2023. Perhaps more interestingly,  

what we have is already quite decarbonized. 
More than 50% is green in that sense.  

We have to understand in this context 
that we are the majority shareholder and  

one of the main suppliers of wind solutions. We 
are number one in the global market offshore,  

and we are, in other areas, 
number two or number three.  

So, I believe we are quite well positioned in 
offshore and increasingly relevant for the future.  

We also have a strong pillar of our company 
based on transmission technologies. Transmission  

technologies or switching products in the ?? 
And it's clear from our perspective that this  

transmission technology will decrease 
carbon because the difficult tension between  

energy generation and consumption 
will be changing over time,  

so transmission really has a very important 
role. In this context, it's relevant that we  

not only are discussing the transmission of 
energy as such. We also have to care about the  

stability of the ?? we have signed a cooperation 
with one of our customers on the development of  

new stabilization technologies. So that will 
be of highest relevance for us. But also then,  

times are changing and we are focusing on green 
technologies, mostly when it comes the portfolio  

which we have in investor applications as we call 
it. Decarbonization technologies ready to roll.  

And with that, this can be combined with 
the requirement of our customers such as BP  

or Shell or Total. And then we still have the 
fear of conventional power generation. Please  

bear in mind that we still, in the context 
of energy transition, are making the switch  

from coal to something else. In this context, we 
have to demonstrate that the change is massive.  

160 gigawatts or so. And this has to be a short 
timeframe, and therefore we still understand clean  

and cleaner gas technologies for power generation 
also is the answer to that. So, in total,  

our portfolio is also quite clean and 
will become even cleaner in the future. 
 

Thank you very much, Dr. Eickholt. 
Well, thanks. that's another keyword.  

Many sectors, many investor sectors still rely 
on fossil fuels like shipping or transportation,  

and in our view, in the future that will 
train. Will make the transition very possible,  

and in many cases, that has to do with either 
hydrogen or technologies and fuels related  

to that. For instance, synthetic fuels. We are 
highly engaged in wind. We have a site in Chile.  

And there we have a setup where from renewable 
sources ?? it's a little bit of a ?? some of these  

technologies are about to be scaled up, but 
it's working such that the renewable sources  

in order to then kind of spread the water and 
also with the help of additional, you know,  

compression and gas compression technologies 
CO2 will be separated from the air to form with  

hydrogen to form synthetic ethanol. We plan to 
produce 30,000 litres of e fuels as early as 2022.  

The significance of that, you know,  

2024, we plan to have that 55 ?? and in 
2026, we plan that to be 550 millilitres. So  

this project has quite the commercial background, 
which makes us understand where the journey  

is going, and we believe there will be also 
similar projects like this in the future. 
 

Thank you very much. Another question 
for you. Globally, we are seeing intense  

discussions about right technology. Can 
you briefly let me know what technology  

or technologies you think will prevail? 
That's certainly one of the most difficult  

questions. We believe the future is likely more 
complex than past. In the past, you had a kind  

of ?? energy consumptions in the power plant. But 
when it comes to the setups, we tend to believe  

that, you know, the concept of an urban region or 
most cases in a region plays a role where we have  

a combination of various kinds of technologies. 
We will have renewables like wind helping with  

renewable energy, wind energy in that sense. We 
will have the application of gas turbines which  

are then run on not natural gas, as it is perhaps 
today, but there will be a fuelling with the help  

of hydrogen that may go up to 70% or 80% or 100%, 
depending on the commercial conditions there. We  

have to apply certain storage technologies. Heat 
is going to play a central role in many areas.  

Electrical power is used to generate heat and, 
therefore, we feel for instance when it comes to  

the heat needed for western households will 
very much be around in the future. The future  

is complex. It's going to be about individual 
solutions for regions which are in discussion.  

Also that is true for industrial sites. And in 
our perspective, it is of utmost importance that  

you have the choice of those technologies and 
can apply the technologies as needed at the point  

in time. So, it's a mix. Unfortunately, 
no simple answer really is possible. 
 

Thank you very much, Dr. Eickholt, for 
your insight into this very complex theme.  

I'd like to thank you very much 
for joining us live today.


