Good morning, everyone.

You will have to give me a moment to take
this all in - it's incredible.

I would like to thank you all for denying
here this morning, and a special thanks to

ask me to be here.

This is a tremendous honour and a humble experience
for myself and for my organisation.

I have a quick question before we get started:
did anyone here have a chance to go to the

tech festival yesterday?

Okay.

You can put up your hands.

I see a couple.

Well, that's good.

I mean, I understand that we have several
dignitaries here with very, very busy demanding

schedules, but I hope that your schedules
allowed you the opportunity to see and to

really meet some of the innovators and thought-leaders
that were at the tech festival.

It was a fantastic event - there was virtual
reality, block-chain, smart grids.

I mean, what a time to be alive.

We are witnessing tremendous technological
advances.

But how do we get them to the people who need
them the most?

The people who have contributed the least
to climate change.

The fishermen in Lake Victoria whose entire
livelihood will be wiped away.

I mean, I'm an optimist - I'm not doom and
gloom, I'm really very optimistic.

Sometimes, you have to look at the cold, hard
facts.

By 2050 if nothing is done, in Uganda, we
will have zero forest cover - zero.

This is not our grandkids' problem, this is
our problem.

God willing, many of us will be alive at that
time.

Unfortunately, deforestation is not the most
exciting conversation.

If we are to talk about energy, and in the
context of Sub-Saharan Africa, we have to

talk about forestry.

Over 80 per cent of the demand for energy
is on cooking fuel.

This is a direct impact on our forests, flora,
fauna, and our people.

I had the honour of taking part in the recent
African Union summit.

I sat a roundtable with leaders of industry
and even two heads of state.

I listened closely to the speakers out of
a tremendous respect.

When it was my turn to speak, I spoke about
humans, about people, about human dignity.

I spoke about that fisherman in Lake Victoria
who has to relieve himself in the lake because

there's no sanitation system.

There's no infrastructure.

There is no electricity.

We are here to discuss the energy transition,
but when we're talking about many parts in

Sub-Saharan Africa, the transition is into
having electricity, into having clean and

sustainable cooking fuel.

I gave a lecture at Yale in the US at the
School of Management.

It was a great, mixed group - students from
public health, environmental protection, commerce.

I even had my daughter with me.

Can you imagine, seven years old, and she's
already attended a lecture at an Ivy League

University!

There was one student who stood up to me.

He came up to me and thanked me for my work.

He said that his studies were for naught.

He said our problems back home were just too
big.

How do you solve hunger, disease, poverty,
youth unemployment?

And this young man understood these problems
in a much deeper way than myself.

He was born and raised in Kenya.

I, too, was born in Kenya.

My family sought refuge there during the war
in Uganda.

We arrived in Canada as refugees.

I don't have a background in energy at all.

My undergraduate degree is in public administration,
and I don't want to offend the honourables

in the room, but I did find the study of government
to be a little tiny bit boring!

So, I moved on, and I worked in fashion and
entertainment.

While that industry is thought of as vapid,
and shallow, and vain, I really learned a

lot about vision.

I learned about teamwork and execution.

I remember, early on in my energy journey,
I had dinner with two energy executives.

I didn't know anything.

I mean, they would ask me a question, and
I would take a bite of food, and chew it,

and like, buy time to think.

I had no idea what they were talking about.

I came clean and confessed, and I shared my
vision with them.

They told me that my naivety was the greatest
thing I had.

They said if I had any idea how difficult
these problems are to solve, I wouldn't bother.

Well, now I know, and, guess what?

I'm still here.

In fact, I'm here!

Which is amazing.

So, to go back to my question, about solving
youth unemployment, disease, malnutrition,

the answer is collaboration.

Or should I say inclusion.

If we are talking about energy, we should
also be talking about forestry.

If we are talking about technological advances,
we should be talking to the local developers

as well.

These are the ones who will be taking the
advances to market.

If we want more women in the sector, we need
to show there are many career paths.

This is not just a man's work.

We need to empower ourselves.

We need to be bold.

I know it is hard to be what you've never
seen, which is why I'm so thankful for the

opportunity to stand here in front of you.

As an outlier, a young woman, a local developer,
a refugee, an entrepreneur, a mother.

My daughter believes in the Bakulu Power philosophy
- well, she has no choice! - but she has asked

to change her last name to Bakulumpagi-Wamala,
But with one caveat: That I teach her how

to spell it first!

She has designed her own business cards.

Inspiring and motivating my daughter personally
as a mother, to have the opportunity to stand

here and set an example for the young women
and men across Africa and around the world

is an honour.

And, for that, I thank you.

[Applause].

Can I ask you to return to the microphone,
because, to you, one quick question if you

don't mind.

You have successfully built up your company
against a great many odds, in fact.

Even if you say the study of government was
a teeny bit boring for you, nonetheless, I

would be very curious to know what you see
as an entrepreneur as the most crucial policy

step that needs to be taken in countries like
Uganda but in other countries in the developing

world as they are trying to move forward with
the energy transition.

How can they create what is called an enabling
environment for the kind of companies and

businesses and investments that are needed?

I could talk all day!

I do see my minister from Uganda, so no pressure!

To use Uganda as an example, we have a rural
electrification agency which is fantastic.

We have created three mini grids, where they
are be helping us with metering and distribution

lines.

I think it is amazing to see the government
even be able to allow a local developer, a

new company to come in here, and to work with
us, and to see where both of our strengths

shine, and to do it together.

I think that's the way forward.

As an entrepreneur, I think that there's so
many policies.

Things like wage subsidies, things like training
subsidies - if I were able to hire more people,

I could go a lot faster.

You can see subsidies around the world.

They have them in Canada, and Ontario specifically,
where the government would, say, pay 60 per

cent of the salary for workers in high, high-priority
sectors.

For about six months, and the idea is that
you go faster, you grow, and you're able to

support - able to make payroll after.

So I think those things would help our entrepreneurs
go faster.

I think Uganda is doing a great job.

I think that we should see more collaboration
through forestry and other sectors.

I don't think it's good to do things in a
silo.

We should consider water as well, human settlement,
so just more collaboration.

Thank you very much.

, Lucia Bakulumpagi-Wamala!

She said it right!


