Good morning, everyone.

Thank you for having me.

Jules did ask me to be short and punchy, and
I'm an investment strategist, and I've never

seen a clearer gap between reality and perception,
which is a spectacular opportunity consequently

for investors to make or lose money.

I'm confident in saying that this energy transition
will have a dramatic impact for better or

for worse on the wealth of every single person
in this room within the next five years.

So, I will give an unashamedly investment
perspective which really can be summarised

as follows: There is a shift going on.

The investors make or lose money at tipping
points, or during shifts, and they make or

lose money right at the start of the process.

So, if I start with what this, I guess, this
forum very well appreciates, the world is

shifting from fossil fuels to renewables,
indeed, it was the satire to reduce carbon

emissions which drove policy, efficiency,
innovation.

Next, of course, the spectacular fall in the
cost of key renewable technologies has become

the new driver.

You then get further imperatives kicking in
such as local pollution and energy security,

and then finally, of course, we have the famous
emerging market energy leap-frog which a number

of people have alluded to, which will complete
the shift from one state to the other.

This is of course assisted by a positive feedback
loop.

As the cost of renewables falls below that
of fossil fuels, so policymakers can stop

subsidising renewables and tax the externality
of fossil fuels which speeds up the process

of change.

What this means therefore is that demand for
fossil fuels is actually about to peak.

This is not at all widely appreciated or understood,
but I can assure you demand for fossil fuels

is about to peak.

Let me give you a couple of statistics to
back this one up.

Already in 2016, two thirds of the growth
in electricity supply came from non-fossil

sources at current growth rates for solar
and wind.

All-electricity supply will come from non-fossil
sources by 2020, 2021.

Because electricity is 80 per cent of the
increase of incremental demand, fossil fuels

demand will peak shortly after that.

People often say this cannot be.

Solar and wind are tiny.

Actually, we've seen this many times in history:
incumbent demand always peaks when challenges

are relatively small.

I call it the five per cent rule.

Financial markets are not driven by size,
they're driven by change, and, as demand peaks

and falls, you get a series of very well appreciated
and very obvious consequences, so you get

stranded assets.

The best example of this of course is the
European electricity sector.

$200 billion of writedowns in the last eight
years.

The lights are still on, facilities are still
there but mask writedowns.

You get bankrupt sees.

Witness the spectacular series of bankruptcies
across the coal sector across the world when

global coal demand is just two per cent of
its all-time peaks.

Then you get new competition.

Again, look at any of the energy sectors now.

There are huge amounts of new competitors
coming in.

The best example being perhaps the car industry,
and, of course, particularly resonant and

significant issue 
for Germany.

We made this schematic.

It creates more and more victims.

Gazprom was perhaps the first victim.

It once had an aspiration to be a trillion-dollar
company.

Other victims would include GE, Volkswagen,
Peabody.

It is part of a continuum, a continuous change
of creative destruction.

The next vulnerable areas will be oil and
bass, energy transportation, so, I think it

is fair to say that this energy transition
and the financial impact of it should not

come as a surprise.

We have been warned.

In my last two sides, I would like to talk
about the magnitude of the change.

Up to one quarter of all equity and debt markets
globally are in fossil fuel and fossil fuel-related,

related stocks.

The built value of the current fossil fuel
infrastructure is 25,000 billion dollars.

A large share of this will have to be in 2050.

All will be worthless by the end of 
the century.

Investors need to prepare for very significant
losses.

Let me conclude on a positive note.

There is another side to this transition.

The world is ready to be reshaped.

As this conference has shown, there are innovators
creating new business models, new ideas, new

growth in solar, wind, electric vehicles,
block chains, and so forth.

We're actually at the start of a dramatic
period of very significant growth.

Bliss, is it, in this Dawn to be alive, someone
said yesterday.

I ask the investors in this room where do
you want to be.

Do you want to stick with a doomed industry
hoping for the best, or have new fortunes

in building the be bi- future?

Thank you.


