So, we move straightaway into our last panel,
and, as I said, it is about how to promote

integrated energy transitions, meaning integrated
across sectors, amongst stakeholders, and

across borders.

So, will be integration in the largest possible
sense.

How can the ongoing transition of the power
sector be extended to the end use sectors?

What does sector coupling mean in the different
policy designs?

Should the future energy system be all electric,
or should it comprise significant direct energy

use in the end-use sectors?

What can policymakers and governments do to
facilitate large-scale private sector involvement

on all levels and in all centres of the word
of integration?

Those are a few of the questions we want to
pose in this very eminent panel that, in fact,

spans an array of roles in designing and developing
the energy systems of the future.

We begin with a brief input, laying out one
vision of what an integrated transition can

mean.

Please welcome the Chairperson of the Danish
NGO's Concito and KR Foundation.

She is also Chair of the OECD's Round Table
for Sustainable Development.

She was formerly European Commissioner for
Climate Action, as well as Denmark's Minister

for the Environment, and Minister for Climate
and Energy.

Connie Hedegaard, please, the floor is yours.

[Applause].

Thank you, Melinda.

You will understand, given my background,
as was just described in politics, I'm definitely

going to use my maximum of ten minutes to
say something about sort of the policy responses

to this, the policymakers and the governments:
how can they contribute to all the challenges

we've been discussing mere for a couple of
days?

The more technical questions for good reason
I will leave to some of the experts that will

come up here.

Before I go into sort of what is it that is
really needed on the policy side, I just thought

we should take maybe just ten seconds to celebrate
how far we have actually come.

I understand that, for two days now, you've
been discussing all the challenges here, and

I understand that, if you're working in your
daily life, and you're chairing and presiding

over energy companies, or technologies, or
whatever, there are so many challenges.

But, still, if ten years, or even just five
years ago, we had been here and we had said

to each other how far advanced the world would
have been when it comes to more and more renewables,

get the price down, the other things that
we want for a lot of other purposes, then

many of us would not have believed it.

If in doubt, just go back and revisit some
of the forecasts by the International Energy

Agency.

Nobody saw how fast could come by.

I know that there are no roses without thorns,
so now we have the challenges with a lot of

cheap energy, potentially abundant energy.

It challenges the traditional business models.

It also challenges our ability to change and
transform with the speed and the scale that

we need, and it very much challenges the political
systems' ability to pursue coherent policies,

to have a coherent way of regulating and of
planning.

Just one example:: yes, we are expanding in
many countries with renewables, also in the

country here today, but while that is not
a walk in the park, it is even more difficult

to close down obsolete capacity, old technologies,
and it must be part of the political responsibility

not just to sort of move forward with the
one side of the coin, but also being able

to sort of take the consequences, because
else the consumers, the citizens, and the

businesses will have to pay a price they else
need not pay.

Let me give one example.

I'm sure that you have been discussing a lot
electrification.

Also, electrification of transport.

I happen to be on the Volkswagen's sustainability
board.

I don't need to explain to you why they thought
they needed such a board.

But, of course, Volkswagen, the biggest car
manufacturer in the world, has really now

decided to pour 30 billion euros into electrification
over the next five years.

Great.

But the big fear is what if - what if - the
demand is not ready when the products are

ready?

What if policies and realities are getting
out of sync?

What if the infrastructure is not ready?

I mean, it's not enough to find out how to
provide, how to produce intelligently - how

to produce energy intelligently and how to
produce electricity intelligently.

Now it's how to use energy intelligently.

What to do next?

As I mentioned, there must be some continuity
and coherent policies.

That must be the first prerequisite for having
more partnerships, public-private, and have

more private investments here.

We must also realise, also at the policymakers'
level, that winners and losers in this huge

transformation is not one-to-one the same.

I think that we still need to address more
the social component here, social strategies,

how to cope with such a big transition, and
how to reskill employees.

There's a huge challenge there that I think
is one of the reasons why we are not moving

to this scale that we need with the speed
that we could do otherwise.

I also think we have a challenge in our democratic
systems, because, the decision authority in

the energy sector is spread out, not only
through many different levels, you know, internationally,

regionally, nationally, but also locally,
but we are also very much still thinking in

a silo organisation, in silo structures.

In Denmark - I'm from Denmark - we have a
transportation minister who recently had a

question on CO2 emissions and transport, and
his answer to that was you will have to ask

the climate minister about that because I'm
responsible for transport.

I mean, that kind of silo thinking in politics,
we have to do away with it, or we will not

be able to make the holistic approaches that
Melinda was talking about.

So that get away with the silo organisation,
we must think much more cross-cutting and

the targets and the direction set must be
clear and long-term, because else we cannot

sort of have all the different levels of decision-makers
being consistent part of the whole solution.

I think that this to create an enable toing
environment, that is steady and reliable.

That is probably the biggest challenge we
have ahead of us.

And we have so many examples, so many countries,
and the one we are in now, it is just one

example of how challenging this is.

I have two more points, and I think really
to get there, may be the most important reform

needed at the policymakers' end, this is to
get the pricing right, and, no, I'm not talking

about emissions trading, and things like that,
but the whole incentive structure.

The polluters pay principal, not just talked
about but implemented.

A consistent way of pricing externalities,
pricing waste, put a price on inefficient

use of resources, and of energy, and the opposite
rewarding those who are using, for instance,

energy maximal efficiently.

And one thing, having the 2050 perspective
in everything we do, in all the decision-makings.

We have written about short-termism and politics,
and particularly when we talk about climate,

when we talk about energy, we talk about this
transition, we really need to understand that

we must apply a long-term perspective, the
2050 perspective.

Also, we must think more in terms of life
cycle, life cycle assessment, and total cost

of ownership.

That is another way of saying long-term thinking.

I know that, to you, this seems just, yes,
almost naive.

Don't we do that or - for sure, that's not
the case, and it's one of the really big challenges

here.

If you really want heat pumps, electrical
vehicles, excess heat, and other things transform,

then the tariffs, the taxes, the way we price
things must sort of be adapted to that new

reality.

The second-last point is innovation.

I really think that's where policymakers need
to invest of more in innovation, and not just

in national innovation.

Now, I know that this is an international
audience, but many of you will still be Europeans.

We will still have a new European budget coming
up, a budget proposal.

It is characteristic, isn't it, that there's
still too much - as a member state, "I want

my share of the pie, and of the innovation
pie.

" Why isn't it that we're much better to understand
that we have signed up to some international

agreements, the Paris Agreement, and all this,
and we must pool our resources of more to

maximise how fast we can make the innovation,
including the social innovation, but we must

use data, use digitalisation, all these things.

There's so much that we could do by a much
more co-ordinated effort in the innovation

field, and, of course, private public together.

In parallel with that, we should also not
shy away from - there's been a tendency recently

that standards and regulations are red tape.

Intelligent regulation, it is not picking
winners, it is not red tape, it's what it

takes to enable to speed up the innovation
that we so badly need.

Just want to end up saying I really see some
hope for us, taking some bigger leap also

in the energy sector, and why is that?

It's because I really see investors starting
to change track.

At Macron's climate summit some months ago,
celebrating the two years of the Paris Agreement.

The world's largest insurance company said
they're no longer going to insure coal.

The Norwegian Oil Fund said we're not only
going out of coal investments now, also we

will go out of gas and oil investments.

The Bank of England Governor said then and
recently that he wanted the whole sector of

what he called a Minsky moment, and I thought
what is a Minsky moment?

He was the economist that, before the financial
crisis warned everybody that a huge economic

crisis would come.

But people would not listen to him.

Why is he mentioning this here?

Because he says, if we really, in the investors'
community do not get it, how big the risk

is by not doing this transformation, and if
we're not changing our investments, then we

are in for a huge Minsky moment.

I really think that, when it comes to investment,
pension funds, banks, and then we really see

on many continents that investments start
to change direction, and, as money makes the

world go around, that's what is needed to
get the energy transition speeding up and

scaling up.

So, we enough talk about this, talk the transition
up, make it tangible to the citizens what

are the positive things in this transition.

We must invest more in innovation, and then
we must create an economic system and we must

work with economic models that reward allows
for long-term thinking.

I really think that this last point is probably
the most important help that the policymakers

can give to your sector, and to the industry.

I think there a risk that too many people
own have the 2020 or the 2030 horizon when

decisions are being made.

What we really need to grasp and understand
is, no, this whole transition is not stopping

by 2030, it's even not stopping by 2050 with
80 per cent or 85, or 90 per cent, we are

going to zero emissions world, and really
to grasp that, and to incorporate that long-term

perspective in the way we measure growth and
in the way we take economic decisions, that

is the right way as far as I can see it, not
just to more sustainability, but also to more

economic sustainability.

Thank you.

[Applause].

Thank you very, very much, Connie, for the
inspiring words.

May I ask the other panellists please to join
us now on stage.[Applause].

Ladies and gentlemen, our clock is running
down, so I'm going to do the following.

I'm going to just introduce everybody with
the briefest possible name and title.

I'm also going to ask them all to give us
an opening reflection on what they've just

heard from Connie, but I'm going to ask for
them to be as brief as possible on that as

well, because Mr Zhongying has to leave us
at five, and I'm eager to hear a bit from

him.

I'm going to ask everybody to be disciplined,
and then perhaps we can get a little of the

way into our discussion.

So, seated next to me, Mr Thorsten Herd is
Director General of the German Federal Ministry

for Economics and Energy.

He is responsible for energy heating and efficiency.

We will clap at the end.

We're not going to do it.

No, no clapping!

Next to him is Professor Wang Zhongying.

He is director at the China National Renewable
Energy Centre which assists China's energy

authorities in renewable energy policy research
industrial management, and development, and

we're very glad to have you with us at least
for the first part of the discussion.

Seated next to him, Kristian Ruby is secretary-general
of the association that represents the common

interest of the electricity industry at pan-European
level.

And then is Heiko von Tschischwitz who is
CEO of enyway.

And, next to him is Mr David Victor, Professor
of international relations and co-director

on the law of regulation, at the school of
Global Policy and Strategy of California and

heads up the university's deep decarbonisation
initiative.

In a first very brief round of responses,
I would like to get your take on what you

heard from Connie together with a few words
on what an integrated energy transition means

to you.

So, specifically, what are the most important
integrative steps we need to take right now.

That could be integrating actors, sectors
functions - whatever you want to talk about.

What I want to hear is top priority.

Mr Herdan?

Integrated is the opposite of what we did
so far in Germany.

That might sound odd from this point of view.

That's true.

We have to look for new power production.

I don't talk about electricity, I talk about
every sort of power, together with an integrated

infrastructure into that, and integrate it
into the time frame that Connie was mentioning,

2020, 2030, and also 2050.

We should not think when we are doing that
that the technologies of today would be those

which we see 2050, otherwise, it would be
found as like you without any possibility,

so that is integrative.

In the case of China, priorities for the integrated
energy transition, first, we sure is to reduce

the coal consumption, second, oil consumption.

Finally, even be sure to reduce the natural
gas consumptions, but if we want without these

challenges, I think that the key element,
the key element is the electricity, electrification

in the demand side.

If we can as high as possible the electrification
rate, it will solve issues.

Maybe I said this enough.

Thank you very much.

>> So, to pick up a few words of what Connie
said before.

I think the first word would be speed.

This is something we can relate to in the
power sector.

We just agreed on a joint vision in December
last year where we said we will be the enabler

of an accelerated energy transition.

We will strive to decarbonise our sector well
before mid-century, and we will work to accelerate

the transition in other sectors with the help
of clean electricity.

What we need from policymakers to do that
of course are investment frameworks more than

anything else.

We are going to need a lot of money for this
transition, more than we can find in the power

market, and that means we need solid and very
predictable investment frameworks.

To come back to the question of a one key
word for this integrated energy transitions,

I really think it is about integrating electricity
and other sectors, integrating clean electricity

and transport, and in the heating system,
and reinventing the industrial processes that

are very CO2-intensive today with the use
of clean electricity.

Thank you.

>> I think Connie did a great job.

Good intro.

I agree to anything you said, and maybe just
to add one key thing, I think it is very important

to integrate the people into the energy transition.

That's something we heard before, today and
yesterday, and, in my view, it is absolutely

key not only integrating them in producing
energy, that's already done, I think, we heard

it just in the panel before, that Bangladesh
is actually leading with 25 per cent of the

people producing solar power, Germany is second
at the moment with more than one million people

producing energy, but until today, they are
more or less forced to pretty stupidly just

feed in the surplus energy there not using
for themselves, and giving them the opportunity

to trade the energy to become a small utility,
and earn even more money would definitely

motivate much more people to invest in renewable
energy, and that's I think key for success.

Thank you.

Mr Victor?

Thank you very much.

I join folks in applauding Connie's terrific
opening remarks.

I want to see two things in response.

I think integration revolves around electricity.

All different power and energy sources, sure,
but it is likely the electricity is going

to be the backbone of this.

We have a concept in international relations
called soft power.

Sometimes, countries lead because they are
big, powerful, and strong - hard power - and

sometimes, they lead with ideas.

My country used to do that, maybe not so much
now.

But on renewables, Germany is doing that.

I think a lot of folks in the world are looking
to see how we are going to integrate large

amounts of renewables.

I think the new report, the arena, IEA, the
REN21 got it right that there are few markets

in the world that are yet at the point where
we need to do hard things to integrate renewables,

and there are a lot of ways of doing this:
More grids, more demand response, more storage,

a variety of other things, but people around
the world are trying to figure out how you

actually do that at scale, and what it is
really going to cost.

The second thing I want to pick up on what
Connie said about getting the prices right.

It seems to me that we are simultaneously
torquing the energy system to introduce large

amounts of renewables, and then also make
big reductions in emissions.

It's a different energy system from our grandparents'
energy system, and moving in that direction

without flexibility in the policy instruments,
simple, clean, significant prices, flexibility

across different strategies.

I'm really worried that we are going to introduce
a sclerosis inside the energy system by having

a policy for solar, a policy for wind, a policy
for storage, a policy for coal.

I'm just describing how my country does it,
and I understand that most of the rest of

the world does it that way.

The bigger the effort, the bigger the shift
to renewables, the bigger reduction emissions,

the more necessary it's going to be for us
to have flexibility in those policy instruments.

I would say pretty much every government right
now is doing exactly the opposite.

Connie, I want to ask a few questions to Mr
Zhongying before he has to leave us.

So the subsequent discussion that we are going
to have here is going to be a bit more about

sector coupling, in other words, about what
you talked about, the role of electrification.

It is also going to be about bringing consumers
in, and thirdly, I would like to talk at the

end about disintegration meaning decommissioning.

So, since you're not going to be there for
that part, maybe we can briefly talk about

that with you.

You talked about China's intention to phase
down coal.

What kind of measures can you work with to
get the sort of flexibility that you will

need to do that, and what kind of timetable
do you have in mind when you talk about that

phase-out?

Thank you, Chairman.

Just to follow up, I say that the electrification
is very important for the integrated energy

transition.

For example, in our study, even so far in
the present situation of China, we already

started electrification activities in transportation
sectors.

For example, our high-speed train.

Second, for electricity vehicles, we said
the new energy vehicles, so this is very popular

in China.

I think, for the next, even for the normally
cooking, but so far, most of cooking in China,

that's natural gas, coal gas, and biomass,
but I think next step, even for cooking we

can transit to electricity.

So all of this is sector.

Even in those sectors.

I think we can move to the 100 per cent electrifications.

This is our one set.

Heating and cooling?

We have the heat pump, the technology for
the heat pump, and also, in China, you know

the rooftop, we have the solar heater.

That's number one in the world.

We can directly use the heat.

We don't need the transfer to electricity
than to the heat.

So, second, in case of our study, in 2050,
if our electrification reaches 60 per cent,

total primary energy, we can, how to say,
just 80 per cent of the primary energy supply,

that can meet our whole country's energy demands.

If not, that's another precondition.

The circuit per cent of electrification rate,
about the electricity production must renew

energy and electricity must come to 85 per
cent, 85 per cent.

So that we will, in the same time, we will
replace the coal fire productions.

The coal fire power productions, so, another
thing, if we cannot reach the electrification

rate by 2050, present an energy mix, an energy
structure, we may be saw the bubble in the

primary energy command.

That is the confliction of the two days.

Electrification rate, that increases the energy
efficiency, not - maybe two two thirds out.

Second, that provided that the big space for
solar and the wind.

The solar and the wind power productions.

Okay, thank you.

And a shrinking space for coal?

Yes.

We can use the wind power, we can use the
solar PV.

Yesterday morning, in Amin's speech, mentioned
the last year in one year, we increased the

53 gigawatts of our solar asset.

I think that's a big market, and also, I don't
think the renewable energy is expensive.

I think if we can see the fossil fuels, the
environment influence, I think renewable energy

is very cheap.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

I know you have to leave us, so, I will say
thank you very much and let you go to make

your plane.

So we can give him a little more applauds.

Thanks for being with us.

[Applause].

Mr Herd, coming back to sector coupling, if
we can, the government's objective to receive

65 per cent share of renewables in the power
sector by 2030, how do you see sector coupling

and electrification fitting in to help reach
that objective?

One has to understand that everybody is defining
coupling a little bit different.

It means we build a power plant which produces
electricity.

We take this electricity, and transport it
into another sector where this is used instead,

let's say, fossil fuels, or whatever.

That's our understanding of sector coupling.

There are various ways, as I said, some of
you using heat in a different sector but we

say new power plant producing electricity
- renewable one, of course - bringing it to

another sector and using it there.

I think Wang Zhongying is right in one aspect,
where he said for the electrification of parts

of the transport sector, specifically in big
cities, it of course increases efficiency,

because you don't need that much primary energy
if you would use fossil fuels like diesel.

It will make a lot of sense, and it will continue,
and there is some sort of a prerequisite for

us to achieve the 65 per cent goal.

On the other hand, it may decrease efficiency
if we for instance produce electricity, let's

say out of windmills or PV, and then convert
it into gas which we then transport away,

and then we have a higher amount of energy
needed because we have efficiency losses in

that game.

So that would then not add to the 65 per cent
target, it would even lower the possibility

of achieving the 65 per cent target.

And therefore, I think it is very important
that we are not going the - and I don't agree

with my good friend, the all-electric route.

It is a nonsense, to say it very clearly here.

In that case, a nonsense, because if we would
know of today that the future will be all

electric, then someone of us must have a glass
ball in his hand.

We must know that the renewable power plants
are producing no - producing wind and electricity

like wind and PV but does that mean that each
and every application at the end of the day

has to be transformed into an electrical application?

At least I don't know any natural law which
says that, so therefore, I think we have to

be open-minded, and think about also other
possibilities of developing ways, so we, for

instance, will now change our law that we
can install a windfarm which does not produce

electricity.

It produces hydrogen.

There is in between electricity, fine, but
that is directly converted into hydrogen for

various other reasons.

What I'm saying is that we will have some
trouble in order to achieve the 65 per cent

of renewables in our electricity share if
we transport all that renewable electricity

in grids which we yet have not yet built.

There has to be some sort of of a combination
infrastructure, that's what I said before,

and new power plants.

To end up with a very simple figure, which
just gives you the task we have in Germany,

we have an in Germany, an energy demand of
2,500 terawatt hours a we are.

2,500.A Year.

If I would ask you in the auditorium to guess
how much of this 2,500 is the electricity

production from wind and PV, I think there
would be not so much right answers.

It is 150.

So Out of 2,500 terawatt hours energy demand
Germany, we're producing with wind and PV

in electricity 150.

So everybody's looking to the 150 saying I
want to decarbonise myself with this 150.

That does not work.

That means we have to find different ways,
not only simply say we have to electrify everything,

because then we may end up with electric applications
which then would have to use fossil fuels

which are producing electricity otherwise
they cannot run.

That's a matter of fact of integration.

You have to do it together.

Thank you.

So, given the flexibility about what people
understand under this term "sector coupling"

let me ask you, Mr Ruby, what it means for
your industry.

Does it mean all electric?

We heard Mr Zhongying did then say to my follow-up
question, well, solar thermal does play a

role for China, so, in fact, maybe backing
off from the all-electric concept.

How do you see it?

Would you like to force end uses like solar
out of the market?

Whether we are talking about an all-electric
society, the answer is no.

We're certainly talking about a more electric
society, and there is absolutely no way to

decarbonise without more renewable electricity,
without more clean electricity.

It is just a no-go.

We need to be very clear about that.

That does not imply we need to go from today
to tomorrow to 100 per cent electricity, and

it's not going to be feasible.

When we look at the longer timescales, we're
seeing a significant increase in the share

of electricity across the economy, depending
on how deep you go, and that is another interesting

thing in relation to this Paris Agreement.

If you want to increase ambition, increase
the ambition on the climate targets, move

from the two degrees debate to the well below
degrees, 1.5, you're talking about a very,

very significant increase in the use of electricity
across society, but that does not imply necessarily

an all-electric society.

I think one thing I take out from Thorsten's
remarks is that sector coupling, if you produce

hydrogen with a wind turbine, well, for me,
that's still a very significant extent an

electric process.

It is electrolysis and electric generation,
so that is an indirect electrification process

in my terminology.

The question is what part of that, as you
also rightly mentioned, is cost-effective

from a societal point of view, and here, we're
looking into a very, very detailed analysis

that we are currently conducting to find out
what is the right split between these energy

carriers, and what is the right split between
these different parts of the total energy

infrastructure, and here, just one preliminary
comment in this context, the future gas system

will be a smaller gas system than the one
we are seeing today.

It might not make sense to the same extent,
especially if we're moving into these ambitious

climate scenarios to have as extended a gas
system as we have today.

We might want to focus that more on industrial
processes, on seasonal storage, and the things,

let's say, and the functions, the energy system
functions that we can't perform with other

energy carriers as we know it today.

Mr Heiko von Tschischwitz, your response to
what we heard, and how you see sector coupling

translating in a decentralised and prosumer-focused
world?

Yes, that's a very important question, whether
we are discussing sector coupling in a centralised

world or in a decentralised world.

I'm a strong believer of an all-electric world,
even if I agree that there is no law, and

it won't happen in the next five years, but
there will be more and more electrical production

just because the market forces will be so
strong.

Solar power has become already so unbelievably
cheap, and I'm talking about the last 20 years,

but especially talking about the last two
or three years.

And it will continue like this.

In my future world, and we are talking about
the future, not about the past, and about

today, in my future world, each and every
household with a roof will install a PV system

on it.

Just because they can earn money with it.

It has not so much to do with climate change
protection.

The people, they care about earning money.

And, they will just do it because they can
earn money with it.

And then they will all ask themselves the
question: what are we going to do with the

electricity we don't need for our electricity
demand?

And the most efficient way in a decentralised
world to use this surplus energy is not transporting

it to other users, but using it at home for
mobility, or for heating and connection with

a heat pump, and so on.

So this will actually grow from the household
level up, and that's a very, very strong force.

I believe.

Thank you very much.

Now, I would like to get comments also from
Mr Victor, and from Connie Hedegaard, perhaps

also in response to how policymakers can facilitate
if, in fact, you think that's a good aim,

to facilitate exactly that kind of expansion
and flexiblisation.

Let me talk about what we are seeing in the
scientific literature, and I'm keen to hear

Connie's views about the policy side.

I was one of the authors of the last IPCC
reported, and so, in the eyes of my family,

I spent three and a half years flying around
all the remote corners of the world to have

meetings for no obvious purpose, but one of
the things we did in that report, one of the

few things that the energy modelling community
can agree on is that a world that decarbonises

is a world that electrifies.

I don't think we see in the energy modelling
work 100 per cent electrification.

That is aggressive and different.

There are some end uses, freight, a chart
about the power density of aircraft, the Airbus

380, very hard to run on batteries.

Especially at take-off.

And so there are these functions that are
going to remain non-electric.

But it seems like it is going to be an electric
world.

I do think there's a sleight of hand that
a lot of us engage in which is dangerous here

which is to assume, therefore, that the sources
of electricity will be renewable, and they

might be renewable in Western Europe and parts
of America, and a few other places, but in

other parts of the world, we are seeing a
build-out of nuclear.

In Abu Dhabi, the first of four reactors being
commissioned this year, a big Chinese build-out,

and so on, so I think, one of the caveats
in the electrics story is that renewables

is not the same thing as decarbonisation,
and the cost, most of the scientific research

suggests that if you think about this renewables
problem, that the cost goes up by a multiple.

The other caveat I would like to put on this
is about electricity.

Most of the results suggest that the world
is going to become electrified because electricity

is an energy carrier so you can't consume,
except for natural gas, we are seeing the

end of direct consumption of fossil fuels,
so it has to be carried to the final use in

some way.

Natural gas might be a carrier.

Hydrogen might be a carrier, embedded hydrogen
and wind or solar production.

Hydrogen is an interesting carrier.

I would say I put my money on electricity
as a carrier but we haven't yet seen the competition

for the different energy carriers.

The last thing I want to say is I want to
pick up on the comments made earlier about

natural gas.

This is one of the areas where the American
storage is really, really important, because

of the fracking revolution, the American economy
has moved to natural gas aggressively, and

some parts of the United States, not Washington,
DC, but some parts are decarbonising, California

in particular.

I would watch closely how the question of
the future of natural gas is resolved in California,

because you can imagine scenarios whereby
natural gas is consistent with deep decarbonisation,

helps to integrate renewables on the grid,
and you can see scenarios where natural gas

is inconsistent with deep decarbonisation.

Our lab does a lot of modelling on micro grids
which are centralised ways of moving the grid

to the producer, small local grids, and the
economics of microgrids are driven by the

efficiency advantages of the direct combustion
of natural gas locally.

What happens ironically is you get a small
reduction in emissions because the system

is more efficient, and then you get stuck
there because you have no alternative other

than natural gas.

I think the question of the future of natural
gas is one of if not the single most important

unknowns right now around how quickly we go
to electricity, and whether all fossil fuels

are in trouble.

Can I ask one brief follow-up on that, and
I guess it would essentially, if we take our

title of integration, it would be the question
of integrating decarbonisation measures like

CCS.

The economist a - the Economist did an extended
study that said, without those kind of measures,

we simply aren't going to get to the climate
goals.

I think that's right.

I'm pessimistic about us making the goals.

We're bending the word but there's a lot of
difference between bending and diving.

Diving is what we need to do.

If we start diving, CCS will have to be part
of the story, and nuclear and part of the

world has to be part of the story.

We haven't yet figured out how to put together
the politics and hold them together enough

to be able to scale up many of these projects
which is what it necessary for the companies

to go beyond thinking of every single one
of these CCS projects as a one-off expensive

thing to the beginning after whole business
plan where you're going to be making many,

many different CCS plans.

That's very true.

Melinda in the introduction talked about the
holistic approach, and then I also understand

very well what Thorsten is saying, because
we must keep an open mind.

We should not pick winners.

Who are we, policymakers, or anybody else,
to say that is the direction.

? But we have just the dilemma that, somehow,
too many are still sort of waiting for some

kind of signal, "Where are we going?

" And, of course, I understand very well,
many of these really complex dilemmas.

And, without being rude, but now we know that
Germany will not achieve its target.

Many countries will not achieve its targets
for 2020, or we might not come up and fulfil

the target.

But, because we have this time frame, then
the question, and this is basically a question

to you, Thorsten.

Are we not in a situation where me might have
to sort of compromise a bit with sort of the

normal conventional wisdom of how we are doing
politics?

And we sort of keep arm's length, and we don't
be too prescriptive on this or that.

We have to do a bit more hard politics, because,
when you take one direction in the energy

sector, in mini markets at least, there are
also other things that are not profitable

or meaningful, or cost-efficient, so how do
we cope with this dilemma?

I ask it to you because I'm not a policymaker
any more, but you are!

As it comes down to Germany, we have coped
with that question very clearly because we've

said we are going to invest a lot of our money
from our taxpayers into the renewables.

At the same time, we said for various reasons
that our cost reasons, our security reasons,

safety reasons, we are going out of.

So that is where the two big decisions.

We are right now almost at a point where we
put every year 45 billion euros on the taxpayers

for feed-in tariff, very old specifically
PV plants, or we gave 50 euro cents per kilowatt

hour.

So I think we went a very clear way, and the
grid expansion.

45 billion euros every year on the German,
it's not taxpayers, actually, it is electricity

consumers, but most of them also pay taxes.

So, therefore, I think we went this clear
way.

What we did not achieve, what we did not achieve
was at the same time where we have scaled

up is renewables, where we went out of nuclear,
which is by 2022, we shut down the latest

one, also to go out coal.

That is the one and only reason that we are
not meeting the targets in 2020, most possibly.

It is the only one.

That's the only one, because that was a little
bit too much.

That was a little bit too much going out of
nuclear, going out of coal, and then increasing

renewables.

You must see what our percentage of nuclear
and coal is, so therefore, that was an equation

which didn't work out, so therefore, we now
have identified that this is the major task

in terms of electricity production that we
have to agree on that phase-out plan, and

name a date, which we do by the end of this
year, according to our collision treaty.

All I'm saying the other way, Connie, saying
let us today not think that we know exactly

the say the future would look like, and therefore,
I'm not at all against more electric work.

We will have a more electric world.

What I want to say, it's very important for
us if we are thinking about new power plants,

renewable ones, and in our decision, others
may decide on nuclear, and an infrastructure

to that, if we say we need infrastructure
for an all-electric world, or if we need different

energy infrastructures for different worlds,
and I would say there at least we have to

drive a little bit on side in order not to
go a route which at the end of the day proves

to be a cost-intensive one.

That is the major point.

>> Let me ask you, how should us - the theme
is here towards a global Energiewende.

I think a lot of folks in the rest of the
world look at the German experience and say

that's amazing, and it's expensive.

Help us understand how far it can go?

I think other countries have looked at this
and said, "We can't replicate that because

the politics aren't lined up to have that
kind of spend."

Maybe that's true or maybe that's not true.

We keep expecting the politics to come unglued
behind these supports, and yet they keep getting

bigger.

And so help us understand how big they can
get, and what the transition looks like if

there is one, away from direct support to
something else.

>> That's the message when we discussed about
the first Berlin energy transition dialogue,

what we wanted to send out, and we continued
to send that out.

We brought down the price dramatically - dramatically.

It is on the cost of the German electricity
consumers, and therefore taxpayers.

But now, everybody is going to decide this
way.

It is the cheapest possibility in investing
in renewables.

That's the main message, and it's much more
cheaper than doing it in nuclear, whatsoever,

so go that way, and I think another important
point, and therefore, I'm a little bit against

this all-electric world, we will see massive
power production countries around the world,

if I'm thinking perhaps about Chile, we are
going to import renewable energy from them,

if we can dig out gas in Siberia, bring it
into Germany, why should we not also dig out

sun in the other ... and bring it, I don't
know, in electric or hydrogen form to Europe?

That will change the world.

>> I couldn't agree more.

You just mentioned the 50 Cent per kilowatt
hour subsidies 15 to 18 years ago, if we look

at the results of the latest tenders, we are
talking about four cent per kilowatt hour

which is very, very close to unsubsidised
market price.

So, the Energiewende in Germany was very,
very expensive, and it will stay expensive

for the electricity consumers for quite a
few years, but that's all the past.

And we shall talk about the future, and maybe
Germany did a lot for the world in subsidising

the renewables so much in the past ... [Applause].

But, to be fair, we can afford it.

And that's why I think it is good that we
did, but today, the renewables are almost

cost-competitive, and that's why I'm definitely
not a believer in CCS and future coal plants.

Again, just because, for market forces.

The specific production cost of a coal plant
including CCS is much, much higher than on

PV, and we are talking about Germany.

If you look at Africa, at south-east Asia,
south Europe, we're talking about two to three

cents per kilowatt hour PV.

So it is already today the cheapest way to
produce electricity.

Just to add a few point on the financing question.

If we can really minimise the policy support
costs, that's going to be a win-win, also

because the policy-support costs for renewables
come on top of the bill, and that means that,

compared to other energy carriers, it is less
attractive to switch to electricity.

The cheaper we can make electricity, the better,
because it becomes a market choice to make

that switch for the consumers if they choose
between a gasoline-powered car, and an electric

car.

Really minimising that bill from policy support
costs is key, freeing up the bill from other

types of taxes and levies is going to help
that transition to use a more electricity,

and then I think it's really about ensuring
that we get a proper market design that values

the right components of energy with a view
to ensuring there is an investment signal

going forward, and that's really going to
be key to ensure that we make this transition

in the cost-effective way.

We strongly believe in that.

I see you want to comment.

Very briefly because I want to ask a little
bit of follow-up.

That's on coal.

I know you were involved, I was very intrigued
to read that you were involved in community

engagement on dismantling a nuclear plant.

I wonder if you can talk about the role, because
Connie was talking about bottom-up forces

in driving energy transition.

If you can say something about the role of
communities, because of course the big, big

barrier to decommissioning coal concerns about
jobs, the people who are working in these

jobs are voters, a lot of the other costs
of coal are negative externalities spread

about.

70 ,000 coal miners in the US - that's not
a lot, but that's been enough to drive a real

roll back in this area, so how can we work
on a community level to try to get support

for that decommissioning?

On the issue of CCS.

I want to lay down a marker of dissent about
CCS which is that, actually, I think we should

take it seriously, that we had an Energiewende
for renewables, and, thanks to Germany, providing

for the public good, brought the cost curves
down.

We can do the same thing on CCS, and CCS integrated
with gas, two CCS projects four weeks ago,

it is really extraordinary the extent to which
the innovation potential is there, just maybe

not to quite the degree it was for renewables,
so it sounds like Germany is not going to

pay for that.

It could be that Norway will pay for it, and
other projects going on in for way but let's

have a long-term perspective here and recognise
this is part of a portfolio.

The Finnish energy environment minister said
this morning something truly extraordinary

and very un-American in his remarks saying
we are going to shut down coal by 2029 and

have the policies in place to help compensate
the people who - on the panel sitting right

up here.

What is really striking about that is that
governments that have the capacity to think

about the larger civil society, and what you
need to do politically to make wrenching change,

are going to do a better job in this space
than governments that are, in political science

terms, more majoritarian, where folks who
are not in the majority bloc just lose, basically.

That is some of the politics, I think, we're
seeing in the United States.

I chair a panel that is helping oversee the
decommissioning of the largest commercial

reactors in the United States, two-plus gigawatts
of power located between San Diego and Los

Angeles - not, it turns out, a great place
to locate a nuclear power plant but that is

what was done, and so it's there.

I've learned a tremendous amount about local
politics in this process, and, if we are going

to have projects that really scale, and we
are going to have projects that involved shutting

down things that generate benefits, that the
government has to have a much more active

role, not just in starting stuff, but in helping
stop stuff that doesn't make sense, and retrain

workers.

Connie talked about that in her remarks.

I think the whole political perspective of
how do you hold together the coalition in

order to make a real transformation in the
energy system is vital, and, when we think

about this transformation and from an engineer's
point of view, we just miss all that, and

yet it is crucial to making it happen.

I have to say, living in Germany for some
30 years now, the social market economy is

about doing that.

It doesn't always work perfectly, but the
idea of bringing all stakeholders into the

discussion, and then looking for socially
tolerable ways is a key part of the German

approach, and let's hope it can work in this
case.

Mr Ruby had a comment.

Just a few remarks on this.

This is unquestionably an important part of
this discussion.

Many of your members have large coal fires.

They have a big portfolio of the solutions,
and they also have the legacy plants, so we're

in the midst of this transition from the one
to the other.

But, whereas you, we were all sure that Germany
would tackle their business eventually, we

have to acknowledge that there are really
different starting points for this discussion

in Europe.

Germany is around I think 40 per cent coal
today, and we have countries in Eastern Europe,

for example, where we are talking about 70,
80, 90 per cent, so it's really different

starting points, and the policy and the legislation
needs to reflect that.

That's really, really important.

There's not a one solution that fits all.

Then we need to stress there there is a societal
responsibility here, because coal societies

are really built around that energy, and around
the mines, the power plants, and, in some

of these regions, it is like the Googles and
Starbucks that will jump into that region

as soon as you close the mine - not at all.

We need to look at the societal and social
challenge that comes with it, and therefore,

let's use some of the EU money we have, for
example, during the time of Connie would be

decided that the EU would use around 20 per
cent of the EU budget for climate and energy-related

purposes.

We say why not use even more for those purposes
because it is a core task.

We've decided on that.

Let's try to say let's move it up if we really
want to be serious about accelerating this

transition.

I know Connie wants to speak to that.

I must say, Connie, when I was getting ready
to the ready for the panel on carbon pricing,

there are not encouraging use of funding when
it comes to - a lot of it doesn't wind up

doing what it is supposed to do.

That is why, to use the common EU budget,
talking about Europe, there is a huge potential

there.

I remember when we had to sort of allow Spain
to continue to subsidise some coal areas,

of course, if I were a governor in Poland,
having 100,000 people in my sort of region

depending on coal jobs, I would think that
this whole low-carbon talk is horrible.

Of course I would.

I could not see my way out of it, but the
interesting thing is that there are so many

who actually have proven that there are clever,
is that right workable strategies to transition

there.

I mean, in northern France, they have done
this, and in the Manchester region, they've

done this.

Essen has done this a lot.

Today, they're reskilled, they're now in the
data business, whatever.

It is doable.

But I would agree 100 per cent that the seven-year
long EU budget, the social funds there, should

to a much larger degree be ear-marked to support
us doing what we, in agreement among the member

states, have said that we should do.

That should just be a no-brainer, and I thought
seeing it from an EU perspective, I think

that many more citizens would see an added
value in what comes from the EU, because why

is it that your tax money should go from your
capital, from your own nation through Brussels

if you cannot see a real added value when
it comes back again?

It should go for some joint priorities, and
this is a joint priority.

It's really important to be smart about this
and say first of all, in this transition,

we need back-up capacity for a while, and,
secondly, so let's do it at the right pace,

secondly, let's be smart about how we do it.

The places where you have power plants today,
they were actually connected to the grid,

so, think smartly about what you do with the
plant, see if you can repurpose it, my President

from the Enel group, he took - I can't remember
how many of his power plants, said let's see

what society wants to do with them.

Maybe they want to build a fish-farm, or maybe
just a grid service station, because you have

an infrastructure there, see how you can use
it for the purposes that society wants to

use it for, and I think there is really some
clever thinking in applying circular economy

principles to this, rather than just say,
tear it down, think about what you can use

this for, how you can repurpose them to the
benefit of this transition.

Thank you very much.

Let me ask Janelle to return to us on stage.

If you would join us.

Gives questions that you have as well as what
you found on the final poll that you posted.

Thank you.

Let's start with the poll, shall we?

It gives you a chance to reading to it.

When will global energy sector integration
be completed?

The majority of respondents say it will be
completed in 2050, that's 48 per cent, less

than half.

With the next answer in terms of the ranking,
in 2014, 29 per cent.

18 per cent of you say it will never be completed.

And, five per cent of you are looking further
into the future with 2060.

Never say never!

Never say never!

In a goes for the 18 per cent of you who said
that!

So, how about questions?

We have two.

Good to hear panellists discuss the importance
of renewables electricity but what will be

the role of non-electric energy, thermal,
non-thermal, biomass been that's one.

Thorsten doesn't believe in an all-electric
society.

What does he propose we use?

You can get us started, Thorsten!

>> To keep me silent, that's always a good
idea!

I think the first question directly answers
the second question.

That is one point.

We have some other technologies which we need
to explore and not thinking that the electricity

I was talking about, all-electric at the terms
of the end use, electric appliances.

For me, it is quite clear, if I have a windfarm,
for instance, or if I have a large PV park,

which is producing electricity in between,
but directly converting it into hydrogen,

for instance, then it does it because there
is an application which does not need electricity,

but it needs hydrogen, so then this is a non-electric
world.

It also needs not to build infrastructure
for that electric infrastructure, I need other

infrastructures.

That's the simple answer to that.

And, to one other point, I think we were talking
about sector coupling, and integrated.

What we haven't talked about is integrated
power plants.

What do I mean with this?

I only know of one technology which is PV,
which can be theoretically integrated into

each and every structure that we can think
of.

That would mean at the end of the day, we
would have no Capex for that because it can

take over function.

We have none anyhow due to the sun, and is
this sector coupling?Do we need infrastructure

for that?Do we need infrastructure for that
additional one?

Is this something where this house, or whatever,
integrated directly produces its own energy

and then it doesn't play any role, whether
it is electric or not?

So I think that is something where we also
need to think of a little bit more about integration.

Two other aspects of this.

One is the hydrogen discussion.

There are a lot of ways to make hydrogen.

Some of them are electric, some of them are
not electric.

We could end up using a lot of the glass infrastructure
and blending a lot of hydrogen.

It's what we did in the 19th century - go
back to the future, producing the hydrogen

in a different way.

It is really impressive that Weir talking
about the big changes in renewables that are

the result of several decades of very expensive
policies.

We are still in the early, early stages of
strong signals to the transport sector to

find ways to decarbonise, and so we haven't
begun to see the great competition for that.

We're talking today a lot about electricity,
and people are excited electric vehicles whole

country will share that view one guy even
sent his up into space, but the innovation

potential on the front of various types of
synthetic liquid fuels, we've barely begun

to see what is possible there.

It could be that the transportation and direct-combustion
uses use liquid fuel for the carriers, and

that will be a non-electric future but one
with a very different, some companies placing

big bets on butanol right now, for example.

Does anybody have a final word, really a word
like, one sentence, that they would like to

say before I close our panel?

>> Yes, of course, because nobody has done
so far, Melinda, I would like to thank you

for these excellent two days of moderation.

[Applause].

Thank you.

And, of course, all the team who did this
tremendous work for more than 2,000 people,

and which also selected you as our moderator,
that was extremely good.

Thank you.

[Applause].

>> It is always a great pleasure to have a
moderator who is not just moderating but who

has a lot of knowledge on what she is moderating,
and in that respect, you can be pretty sure

that somebody will approach you again for
this nice 2019logo.

I hope so!

>> You will have to have good excuses for
not being here in 2019.

Thank you very much.

I appreciate that.

Then I will say thank you to all of our speakers,
and I will let you lead the stage so that

Janelle and I can briefly wrap it all up.

So, thanks very much to all of you for this
truly insightful discussion.[Applause].


