Dear minister, Peter Altmaier, ladies and
gentlemen, members of the German Parliament,

State Minister Ahnen, Vice-President of the
European Commission, Mr Sefcovic, Mr Amin,

Mr Birol, Ms Bakulumpagi-Wamala, ladies and
gentlemen, guests, welcome to the Federal

Foreign Office here in Berlin.

Welcome to the fourth Berlin Energy Transition
Dialogue.

I'm really delighted and so delighted to look
into this lovely [German spoken].

It is important to see people of responsibility
who have come here today to talk about a major

global issue: The global energy transition.

And how to progress it.

There are many reasons why it is so important.

We have come together for the fourth time
for this Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue,

and that shows that the global energy transition
is actually happening.

The first steps have been taken.

There is a global trend towards sustainable
energy supply and we want to boost that trend.

But the energy transition won't just happen
on its own, and we don't have an unlimited

amount of time.

All around the world, including here in Germany,
this major change is creating major challenges

for us.

We want to tackle these challenges together.

That's why we've come here today.

Going it alone in individual countries, or
confrontation won't help us.

We are convinced that we are facing global
tasks, and we need to find global responses,

common responses be to these global challenges.

We want to take the partnership-based approach
of multilateralism.

The international community has committed
to the Paris Agreement and to the agenda 2030,

the sustainability development goals.

I'm convinced that, if we fail to implement
agenda 2030, then we will soon find ourselves

confronted with a world with much greater
risks to our servility civility and peace.

Germany is resolved to attain the sustainable
development goals, and that is why we are

working very hard to make progress on the
energy transition here, and that is why we

are advocates of international energy and
climate dialogue.

The energy transition is not a sufficient
but certainly a necessary condition for a

stable and peaceful world.

Ladies and gentlemen, in this context text,
let me take two recent encounters I have had

to illustrate to you what that means.

And where it becomes particularly obvious.

At the end of March, I was in New York, and
I met with ambassadors from the small Pacific

and Caribbean island states.

We all know that these countries are particularly
hard-hit by climate change, and specifically

by extreme weather events and the rise in
the sea levels.

This threat to their lives is creating great
insecurity, and also, to my greater - to the

effects of the climate.

This encounter made it very clear to me once
again just how important it is to do our work

here as well as we can.

Therefore, I agreed with the island states
in New York that we should take a specific

step that we should have a group of friends
at the United Nations which would focus more

on climate and security at the UN, and, to
anchor this in the UN agenda, because that's

where we need to discuss this.

We need to get the interconnection between
Claimant and security on the international

- climate and security on the international
agenda before they become acute.

That's the way we understand a preventative
foreign policy.

Germany is I think you will know currently
applying for a non-permanent seat on the Security

Council of the United Nations, and this issue
between climate change, fragility, and security,

is something we want to place right on the
centre of the agenda, and therefore I would

be grateful if you would support that.

Ladies and gentlemen, the second encounter
I want to tell you about is when I was in

Jordan a few days ago.

Jordan is important for us - an important
partner for us in security in a restless region.

Compared with its own size, Jordan has become
host to very many refugees.

I visited a project supported by Germany there.

This is providing a refugee camp with solar
power on a distributive basis.

This innovative use of solar energy ensures
that a group of people have access to electricity

who otherwise would not have any access to
the grid, and therefore would not be able

to fulfil many of their fundamental needs.

I think this sort of project is a very good
example of the possibilities that renewable

energies create for us.

Jordan can also serve as an example in another
way: It imports a large proportion of its

energy and spends a lot of money doing so,
but it was great potential for renewable energy,

and, in this case of course, solar energy
in particular.

The country has already made some good progress
on expanding renewable energy, and I think

the prospects are fascinating, that a country
like Jordan will be able to create its own

electricity in its own country, able to create
training and jobs in renewable energy.

It will be able to build up domestic value
chains and thus help to reach its own development

goals, and maybe, in future, it will be even
able to export solar power and thus build

up co-operation which will help to secure
peace with the neighbours in the region.

And, that is also what this conference is
about.

It is about these concepts for a future which
is less dependent on finite resources and

on new forms of cross -border co-operation.

Those are the issues we need to talk about
here.

Ladies and gentlemen, renewable energy is
rich in quantity, available virtually everywhere,

and that changes the foreign policy relations
between countries.

The use of renewables reduces dependency on
energy, and it reduces the possibility to

misuse energy as a means of power and as a
means of imposing pressure.

We believe that co-operation on energy policy
is a platform for dialogue, for co-operation,

and for international dialogue and that is
what we want to do here today.

Therefore, very glad that we have the Vice-President
of the European Commission here with us, Maros

Sefcovic.

We also have Adnan Amin, the Director General
of IRENA, and then we have the Executive Director

of the IEA, Fatih Birol.

And welcome, gentlemen.

Your institutions are an example of how the
new energy diplomacy can work.

The energy transition will have an impact
on the international order.

And we can't imagine what those effects will
be yet.

They will quite simply change the geopolitical
realities, and, therefore, we have worked

with Norway and the United Arab Emirates to
set up a global commission on the geopolitical

impact of the energy transition.

Under the umbrella of IRENA, the International
Are you currently,the first session of this

high-level commission will be taking here
in Berlin right after this conference.

I'm already looking forward to hearing the
results.

Ladies and gentlemen, a lot has been achieved
in recent years on the road towards a sustainable

energy supply and a co-operation-based energy
policy all around the world.

We have thus, for the first in place for combating
climate change, for prosperity, and security

of supply.

We don't want to rest on our laurels and leave
it at that.

In many cases, countries' energy mixes include
coal, oil, and gas, and we need to work further

on this transition.

There are a lot of tasks to sort out on the
way to completing the global energy transition,

both in Germany and all around the world.

We want to contribute to the solution of these
challenges as a reliable partner, and we want

to make a contribution towards that today
at this conference.

I hope that you have exciting and successful
discussions on your road, on our road, to

a global energy transition.

Welcome again, and thank you very much for
coming.

One question if I may, Mr Foreign Minister,
because this term Energiewende - energy transition

- is used around the world now, because if
I talk to an English-speaking audience, I

really don't have to translate it any more,
and still, it is a term made in Germany, and

my question would be, as Foreign Minister,
how would you like to roll out this vision

into the world through foreign affairs?

We will do this by showing that climate change,
and also the energy transition is linked to

stability and security.

Climate change - there are lots of prognoses
that show that - climate change will cause

migrational waves around the world to an extent
we can't imagine today.

If you want to prevent this, then you need
prospect, and you also need a vision for the

energy transition.

I've tried to show this by using the example
of Jordan.

How can we make sure that countries can organise
their energy supply in an autonomous way and

do not become too dependent on other countries?

Because this exerts a lot of pressure on them
if there are hurry hierarchies in their region.

This is why Germany wants to help them and
provide the technology options that we have

and make a contribution to this, because if
you get these things right, and if you do

it as a multinational project, then this will
not only help improve stability in many regions

around the world, it will also make a contribution
to help many regions around the world acquire

more prosperity.

So this is sort of a win-win situation.

This is why we've made this a priority as
Germany should make a contribution to this,

and we wish you a lot of success in doing
so.

Thank you, Mr Foreign Minister.

Thank you.


