So, thank you very much to all of you.

I will now introduce our panel by alphabetical
order.

We're doing a low-protocol panel here.

It's my great pleasure to welcome Dr Saleh
Al-Kharabsheh, Minister of Energy and mineral

resources for Jordan.

The government's renewable energy and energy
efficiency programmes have achieved demonstrable

success in promoting the shift to a green
economy based in part on new market models,

wooer - and we're going to hear more about
that in a moment.

Seated next to me, it is a pleasure to welcome
Liu Baohua - I hope I got that right - Vice

Minister of China's National Energy Administration,
pledged to invest 50 billion euros by 2020.

The IEA describes the scale of China's green
energy deployment, together with foreign exports

and investment as a key determine in any event
behind the momentum of the global energy transition.

Pleased to have you with us.

In the middle, we have Irene Muloni, Minister
of Energy and mineral development for Uganda,

endeavouring to meeting rising demand for
electricity with a programme to boost private

investment in renewables that spurred Bloomberg
ratings to rank Uganda in second place in

Africa for renewable energy investment.

It's great to have you here to tell us more
about that in just a moment.

Then we will skip over to Cedrik Neike.

He is member of the Managing Board at Siemens.

Siemens is a world leader in terms of installed
renewable capacity, and its wind power business,

is one of the world's foremost suppliers of
both and off-shore solutions.

Great that you could be with us.

With us is Terje Søviknes, Minister of Petroleum
and Energy for Norway, due to its high hydro

potential, the huge share of in Norway is
already at 100 per cent, yet Norway is one

of the largest global exporters of oil and
gas.

We will hear shortly what lessons can be learned
from this unique transition model.

Finally, it is great to have with us Francesco
Starace, Chief Executive Officer and General

Manager of Enel.

Approximately half the electricity that Enel
produces comes from non-fossil sources with

36 gigawatts of installed capacity, and the
company has been rated a world leader for

its vision in adapting its business model
to the energy transition.

We're very much looking forward to hearing
more about that.

I'm going to ask you to get us started, all
of you, by telling us briefly in just three

minutes, if you can - because we really want
to make the most of our time - what your countries

or your companies are doing to shape markets
and to boost the role of new market actors,

what tools and levers you're relying on, and
what kind of challenges you're facing.

And, we're going to start with the policymakers,
and then go to industry.

Given the fact that this is a male-dominated
sector, I would like to begin with Madame

Muloni, and as you to give us a sense of Uganda's
experience with liberalised power markets.

How did your country changed with unbundling?

Try the microphone again?

Yes.

Thank you very much.

Uganda has taken on liberalisation and privatisation
as one way of attracting the private sector

to join in the energy markets.

And, this was done for the reason that you
need to invest heavily in the energy market

over a longer period of time.

At times, you find that governments are not
able to support the investments by themselves,

and so the private sector comes in handy on
board to join governments in their developing

energy markets.

So Uganda is a country that has embraced liberalisation
and privatisation policies in the early 1990s,

and we have indeed progressed very, very much
by opening the energy sector for private investors

to join us in participation and we've seen
growth in the energy capacity, in the efficiency,

and in access.

But, having achieved that, they are still
remaining challenges that we need to tackle

still to ensure that that the private sector
participation brings on board efficiency,

but also the bottom line of affordability
and sustainability.

These remain key challenges for us as we continue
with the partnership, developing capacity

in the renewable energy sources, improving
efficiency to ensure sustainability.

The bottom line of affordability of electricity
services becomes a key challenge.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

In fact, we will be talking about access at
different points throughout the conference,

so thanks very much for reminding us how important
that topic is.

Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going now to put
on my headphones, and I suggest you do the

same, because our next speaker will speak
in Chinese.

I would like to come now to Vice Minister
Liu Baohua from the Chinese NEA.

Your country is head of the class, rated number
one on clean energy market energy competitiveness

by Bloomberg.

Nonetheless, you do also still have a high
share of coal, so, I wonder if you would please

share with us your vision of the energy transition
as it is happening in China?

Thank you.

Yes, so, hello, everybody.

Hello, everybody.

Actually, China really is committing itself
to a green and low-carbon economy, and sure,

the scale is large, but also the goal is very
high, so, on the other hand, we have a very

short experience in using new renewable energies,
but, on the other hand, traditional energy

still has a huge share, so, which weans me
to throw a lot of very hard - which means

we have to throw a lot of hard effort to make
the transition successful.

Of course, the developed countries have a
history of more than 100 years in using carbon,

and traditional energies.

However, in China, we only have about 50 years
in traditional energies, so, of experience.

Then we tried to use petrol to replace carbon,
so coal, and, so we have gone through several

steps of replacement and the first step was
that we had a huge development in burning

oil instead of coal, and now we are already
in the - so we already crossed the coal peak.

We have - we do not use coal any more to cover
our peak needs in energy supply.

The major share in rising, so the major rising
share, are non-traditional energy sources.

We are still growing in energy, and the demand
has already reached its peak.

We hope that gas will also then more or less
replace coal as the major source of fossil

energy.

The Chinese government pays the highest attention
to the energy transition.

We have put this at a prominent place in the
plan of national development, and we have

a number of policies - we have a national
action plan which was published in 2016 and

should cover 2016 to 2030.

We have the strategic goals for the energy
transition.

We have this strategic development of a green
low-carbon energy.

We have a new energy mix, and we want to make
sure that non-fossil energies grow up to at

least 15 per cent by 2020, and, by 2030, we
want to reach 20 per cent, and gas should

claim 15 per cent in that energy mix.

We are still working hard to phase out of
coal as soon as possible.

In order to achieve these goals, we have a
number of policies to streamline the energy

mix, and we have some successes in the last
five years which develop us to reach our goals.

Coal - so the share of coal declined by 8.1
percentage points, and the consumption of

gas increased over 60 per cent in the last
five years, and its proportional share increased

also by six per cent, so this is the biggest
change in the energy mix which we have seen

in the last five years.

Then, non-fossil energies now have already
reached 38 percentage points of the whole

energy mix.

And we are now talking about 66 gigawatts
in generating capacity in renewable energies.

So, if we add hydro-power, nuclear power,
wind power, and solar power, then we can safely

and securely claim the first position in the
global scale.

And we still have a blueprint for our work
which we are facing, so, and energy transition

and climate change are the big issues we are
working on.

And this is also - you should also see this
in the context of the 19th party meeting last

November which was an historical transition
also for the Communist Party of China, and

the State Secretary also made it a goal on
that party meeting that China successfully

walks the path of the energy transition, towards
a greener and low-carbon society.

We have to reduce the carbon, the coal share
in our energy mix, and we have to make sure

that the ten years starting from 2020, the
non-traditional energy sources like hydro-power,

nuclear, wind, and solar power, will still
continue to crease.

And clean energy and the total commitment
to clean energy is something which is a major

decision for China, given its past, and we
have seen that the energy development of China

has to be more liberated, has to be more open.

The power generation sector has to undergo
more structural reforms.

So we talk about four revolutions here, and
one co-operation strategy.

We have the energy generation revolution.

We have the consumption revolution, and we
also need more international co-operation

in the sector.

And driving forward with the energy transition
is something which certainly has national

characteristics, but China is totally committed
to doing so, and all the colleagues from abroad

in the international arena will welcome you
to co-operate with us on an equal footing,

and on a level footing, and, in order to really
achieve the huge goal of the world of the

global energy transition, we have to collaborate
and work together.

Thank you very much.

I will ask you to tell us later on in the
next round about the exact mechanisms and

policy tools that you're using to get there.

So, many thanks to you for that.

Let me go now to Minister Al-Kharabsheh from
Jordan.

You, like China, are in the top ten on the
Bloomberg clean energy competitiveness index

I mentioned.

Your country has limited natural resources,
so how important is it for you to diversify

the current energy mix with projects that
are developed by the private sector, and how

can you boost overall investor confidence,
the willingness of the private centre, to

defeat capital to this endeavour in the Jordanian
energy sector?

Thank you, everyone for, this important meeting.

Jordan has a limited conventional resources.

But it has an abundance of renewable energy
resources, mainly solar and wind.

So, to reduce the energy burden on our economy
and budget, we decided to rely more and more

on our local resources, mainly renewable energy
resources, and let me say we have started

a little bit early.

Some serious steps were taken when we prepared
our strategy back in 2007.

Back then, we bought very ambitious target
to reach ten per cent of our energy use comes

from renewable energy resources by 2020.

Back then, we know the cost of energy systems
were high, and that target was really perceived

as difficult to achieve, but we were determined
to get to that target.

What we started to do was to see what were
the barriers to make it fail to materialise.

We had three main attacks, one related to
the legal barriers, and financial and commercial

one, administrative and technical ones as
well.

We started with the legislative legal barriers.

We brought in place legal frameworks that
are conducive to the investors.

We put in place renewable energy laws - a
very modernised law, and we issued the bylaws

according to that law that protects the investors,
and really encouraged them to invest in this

field.

In the financial atmosphere also - in the
financial severe also, we put in the place

of tariffs.

We granted all the renewable energy projects
100 per cent tax exemption from customs duties,

and for something like 75 per cent from income
tax duties, and, for the technical and administrative,

we put in place clear and transparent procedures
on how to deal with those projects, and we

started working in that field.

We experienced some delays, so we from the
government took took bold steps in putting

projects, implementing those projects through
the central government, through the government,

to encourage - we wanted to have a flagship
project to showcase for the investors that

we have something on the ground that is working.

Now, the targets we brought for 2020, we will
exceed that target by 2020, we will have 25

per cent of our electricity generated from
renewable solar and wind.

That's why we are looking into our strategy
that's 2007, 2025.

We will extend the timeline for that strategy.

We will put more ambitious targets towards
2030 and 2050.

We continue to work with the private sector,
and the power purchase agreements.

We have something like 20 investors in the
generation side.

Six of them work in the conventional energy
projects, and the remaining 14, 15, IPP developed

renewable energy projects.

Now, we are thinking of developing the system
that we follow moving from a single-buyer

model to where consumers can choose directly
who will provide them with their electricity

from the generation path.

This is only one of the three models that
we used to encourage and to promote the use

of renewable energy products.

The direct proposals were developers sell
electricity to the public on utility.

But there is another scheme that will follow
willingly, for large consumers, they can construct

their own power generation projects - solar
or wind - and use networks owned by the government

to utilities to consumers wherever their consumption
centres are, and it is also the case for small

consumers.

So we have those three models.

That's why I think we succeeded so far in
achieving our targets.

Thank you for that concrete explanation of
what Jordan is doing.

Let's move from an energy importer to an energy
exporter.

Two questions if you would, Minister Søviknes.

The first one, getting at that very unique
situation I mentioned earlier: how does Norway

take part in a green transition when it's
at 100 per cent of renewables?

The second question would be how your gas
exports fit into the European energy transition,

and, in particular, as that transition does
gather speed and demand for fossil fuels falls,

how Norway believes it will need to reposition?

Thank you very much for being invited to this
important conference, especially our German

hosts.

Norway is blessed with natural resources also
when it comes to energy, so it's correct:

we have a surplus of renewables, and, at the
moment, we are a net exporter of renewables

as well.

But, of course, the oil and gas is the largest
sector.

But, from our point of view, there is no contradiction
between being a large oil-and-gas producer

and taking part in the energy transition.

I can give you a couple of examples: natural
gas is a fast and cheap way for the rest of

Europe to reduce their CO2 emissions by switching
from coal to gas in power generation.

The UK is the most prominent example.

Over the last two years, they have reduced
coal-fired power generation by 60 per cent.

And they have reduced their CO2 emissions
by 25 million tonnes.

That's annually.

That's about half of Norway's altogether CO2
emissions.

A lot of the coal was replaced by gas in this
switch, and it's also an example that a price

on carbon with anywhere carbon floor is working.

- with their carbon floor is working.

We use electricity in other sectors than before,
especially the transport sector, because we

have to reduce our emissions as well, and
we need to reduce it in the transport sector,

in the agriculture, and so on.

In the transport sector, you might know that
we have a had a tremendous success with our

policy framework for electric vehicles.

Last year, 40 per cent of new car sales were
electric vehicles, or hybrid electric vehicles.

It is a tremendous development over a couple
of years.

So it's possible.

But of course, we are a small country, and
we have used large incentives to reach this

goal.

That's by tax exemptions and by other benefits
for EV cars - like free toll roads, free public

parking, and charging stations, and everything.

So you need infrastructure, and you need incentives
for the consumers.

Then it works.

So we are taking part in the energy transition
being a large producer of both fossil fuels

and renewables, and I think, for several decades,
we will need especially natural gas for this

coal-to-gas switch, and we will need oil in
some sectors, like aviation, heavy-duty transport,

maritime sector, and of course, in petrochemical
industry.

But it will be less over the next decades,
but as all serious scenarios tell us, we still

need a lot of oil in the foreseeable future,
so we will be there as a large and reliable

supplier of energy for Europe especially.

Let me come to our private sector panellists
and ask you to reflect on what you've heard

so far.

Maybe you have comments on that, and also
how you see markets developing in future.

I will begin with you, Mr Neike.

Siemens has worldwide experience.

You yourself are the board member for Asia-Australia.

Perhaps you can give us a comparative perspective
on how your company is seeing different companies

managing their respective transitions and
how a private sector actor like Siemens is

supporting them?

Just to describe Siemens - we are a 170-year-old
company.

Our business is distributing, producing be
where consuming energy.

We are looking at the complete value chain.

As you look back been Werner Siemens found
the principle which is electricity.

Only a small part of the energy consumption
is electricity at the moment - between 20

and 30 per cent.

Most of it goes into heating, mobility, et
cetera.

We at Siemens put in a lot of energy to see
the vision is how do we electrify the world,

and how do we decarbonise the world?

The one thing I see in Asia and Europe is
that the Paris" accords are global.

Everybody wants to go decarbonised.

You said it very nicely, we have 85 gig waltz
of wind power, but you need to look at how

do you reduce the energy of consumption and
move a lot of energy consumption into electricity,

which is what we do.

Of the 5.2 R&D we have, a lot more goes into
how do we make a more electrified and decarbonised

world happening?

This takes a lot of help.

We want to collaborate with governments and
do this, because something we heard early

on, there are still a billion people without
electricity, or not clean electricity.

We work with governments actually to take
complete countries and making rate them into

a newer, and more cleaner world.

Egypt is one.

Our colleague from Egypt: we work together
on 50 gigawatts on building the most advanced

energy production in clean energy and gas
to be able to take the country forward into

a sort of next generation energy environment.

It is important because we work very closely
with the German Government to do it to see

what are the best knowledge which we could
copy from Germany and help countries leap-frog

this energy transition in advance.

The one thing that we have is it's not enough
to produce clean energy which is what we are

focusing on, the one thing is because how
do you reduce energy consumption?

The only way is to digitally link the energy
production, the energy distribution, and the

energy consumption, and that's why Siemens
has put in a lot of effort.

We spend more than $10 billion acquiring software
expertise.

We are 170 years old.

We know how to generate and distribute energy,
but we need to make it as digital as possible

in order to make it efficient.

We do this very, very - we do this in a very
advanced way.

The great thing is we take this - if you go
to Korea, if you go to Indonesia, everybody

asks, "What about the Energiewende in Germany?

What can you teach us?

" We share what we have discovered here in
Germany.

If you look at what China does in terms of
generating energy 3,000 kilometres from Shanghai

and build a high-voltage line, we partner
with China because there are things we can

learn out of China also.

It is a give-and-take in this world.

What I was trying to say, in order to address
this Energiewende, we need to think holistically

about production, distribution, and consumption.

We cannot do it alone.

We have start - we partner with industry to
reduce the energy consumption.

We partner with leaders like NL to this how
can we - to think how can we make the grid

more intelligent, and partner with Egypt and
other countries to part.

There's a lot of activity.

You have to think holistically.

We try our best to drive it collaboratively
and with the clear vision that vision that

we need to go carbonless.

Let me ask Mr Staraca to talk about the - it's
delivered a deep shock to your industry.

We saw that poll question that was posed by
Janelle.

A little bit earlier on.

50 per cent of our industry thinks some traditional
utilities will survive the energy transition,

and certainly Enel is a shining example that
this doesn't have to be a death knell.

From your perspective on the basis of the
success that Enel has had, how can you utilities

best adapt, and what do you need from policymakers
to really ensure that, for example, you can

play the most constructive possible role?

Among other things, I'm thinking about policymakers.

We heard Mr Sefcovic talking about the package
he's looking to finalise in the coming year.

Perhaps your thoughts on that as well.

Thanks.

This is a set of heavy questions, I would
say, yes!

Thank you for organising this great event
about transition, because transition is not

only happening in Germany, it is happening
everywhere in the world in different ways

in, in fact, I was answering "we will see"
in the question, okay?

I did not say no.

I said I will see.

But it depends, really, because, what happens
it is, all around us, it's a huge change that

is thrown at the utility world by technology.

Technology is basically driven by two things:
One, as Cedrik mentioned before, the digital

world.

What digital is doing to the world and to
its customer base, that's really, really deep.

Then another huge force changing the industry
is incredible advance in material science.

Materials with which things are made improve
year after year, and they're lighter, cheaper,

they last longer, they perform better, and
they are more efficient, so the combination

of these two forces is the real explanation
of why renewable energy has become so competitive

nowadays, after becoming global.

It became competitive because things are made
with things that perform better.

That's the real reason.

And this change is not something that you
can govern or control, it happens anyway.

It is not something that you can push back.

It is there.

So, as this part of our activity which is
the generation activity, and mind you, this

is a part of our value chain in which most
of the discussions typically sit, so we always

talk about generating energy, and this generation
part is transitioning now from thermal to

renewables because of competitive advantage.

There are increasingly frequent cases in many
parts of the world where the cost of energy

generated by a new plant is cheaper than the
margin of costs of generating with existing

power plants.

That means they're doomed to go out.

It means no-one invests any more in these
kind of things.

Because it's a big industry in terms of investment,
we are very careful where we put our money.

So, if you look around in Europe today, you
don't have a lot of thermal power plants being

planned - not even constructed.

The reason is because we know that, in the
next ten years, maybe there is not even a

case of discussing one of them as far as the
investment is concerned.

So, this is the depth of the transition, but,
because we go back 50 years after the war,

maybe 70 years at this point, we have a lot
of assets that need to be transitioned out,

and a lot of investment that has to come in
to substitute them.

This would take 15 to 20 years.

That's the transition time, but it will happen.

As it is happening elsewhere in the world
too, so, what happens is when a system is

progressively decarbonised through renewables,
we observe two things that happen: The cost

of energy at wholesale level goes down, and,
number two, this cost stabilises over the

years.

So it is no more volatile as the commodities
were before.

As the electricity is becoming cheaper and
stays cheap for a long time, then it becomes

useful for other things.

Then you can start using electricity to heat;
then you start to use electricity to transport

and cook, and do things.

So, we are lucky because due to this transition,
our business, the business of electricity,

gets bigger.

Which is great from our standpoint!

We love it.

However, there is something else happening
which is not so great, or it's a fatting,

that not only things are getting better, they
also become more efficient, so they use less

electricity to do the same job which is fine.

So, at the end of the day, we will sit in
a world that would become less energy-intensive,

and this is happening - GDP per unit of GDP
is going down going forward.

It is going to be less energy-intensive, more
decarbonised, much more electrical, and it

will need a lot of investment in a part of
the value chain which we never talk about

which is the distribution part.

The networks that connect things that bring
electricity, two things need to be digitised

if we want this to happen, and the investment
in digitising network is one of the most difficult

things for regulators and legislators to understand.

So, if I can just close this initial remark:
please pay attention to the networks.

They need careful eyes, because, if you forget
the networks, dear ministers, your systems

will not really carry on with the transition.

They will reach a certain point, and then
they will stop there.

So you need to look at this small thing, the
networks, that we always forget.

They need a lot of attention.

They are a very sexy part of the value chain.

: they need a lot of secrecy.

They can become valuable operation opportunities.

Thank you.

Thank you for that clear message.

Many thanks to you.

I would like to get to know up here on stage,
to share with us what we have heard so far

from the audience, maybe you have a question
or two that we also want to pose to the panel

before I go back to them with the second round.

Who are the new market actors in the energy
transition.

Save that, please, because I -
What are the main opportunities of the new

market reality caused by the liberalisation
of markets?

Let's take that one because essentially, it's
what our panels have been talking about.

To the person who sent that question, the
answer is coming.

And: who are the main beneficiaries and the
main losers of energy markets in times of

transition.

So winners and losers.

Very good.

We will add that to the next round as well,
I think.

If there are any more questions you would
like to add, please use the hashtag #betd2018

and follow us at @greensofa_betd.

Thank you.

Do we have a change on the poll of utilities?

If you would like a look.

Am I connected?

All right.

We're doing the digitalisation of networks
right here now!

Am I connected now?

We will work on that and get you back up at
the end.

There has been a lot of reaction to the comment
that Norway sees no contradiction between

the energy transition and continuing its fossil
fuel business.

Something to pick up!

What is the reaction!

Give us one or two.

I would like to be able to show it.

Is it not showing up?

A question emoji.

Thank you very much, we will get you on stage
later for more feedback.

Let me, in fact, come to all of you with a
second round of questions on new market actors

and new market relationships, and, if you
want to talk about winners and losers while

we do that, also, welcome your comments on
that as well.

I will come to you, Minister Muloni, how the
unbundling of the power industry has benefited

the private sector, whether you have seen
the rise of new actors and maybe some losers

as well?

When we embraced privatisation, it meant we
opened up the market for the private investors

to join us, and, in so doing, we needed to
restructure the entire sector.

Originally, as a country, we had the Ugandan
Electricity Board that was vertically integrated.

It was generating electricity, transmitting
electricity, distributing and selling electricity,

and regulating itself.

So, for us to embrace the private sector into
the energy market, we need to unbundle, and

that saw the creation of three companies:
the generation, the transmission, and the

distribution.

It saw the creation of a regulator, because
now we are embracing the private sector to

come on board, and that we had to ensure that
there was a level playing field.

It also saw the creation of the electricity
disputes tribal, so that we are - the electricity

disputes tribunal, so that we can expedite
disputes.

At the same time, government's responsibility
was to ensure that every Ugandan has access

to electricity, there was creation of a rural
electrification fund, and an agency for accelerating

rural electrification.

At that time, in terms of capacity, we were
only generating about 60 megawatts.

The losses in the sector were above 31 per
cent; the collection efficiency was about

63 per cent; and the connections where customers
were accessing electricity, were a mere 200,000,

and therefore, the access was extremely low.

Numerous outages - so, in terms of reliability
it was really low - and staff productivity

was very low at about 30 per cent.

Of course, the financial position and the
operational performance of that system was

almost at 43 per cent.

Tariffs here were highly subsidised by government
at about 67 per cent.

So, when we did the liberalisation, and attracted
the private sector to join us, we saw a good

number of the private sector come and join
us in the generation.

Right now, we proudly talk about 20 independent
producers, and they're producing over 70 per

cent of our energy in the system.

For your information, Uganda is endowed with
abundant renewable energy sources, so our

energy mix, about 90 per cent, is renewable,
and the ten per cent is for purposes of energy

security.

And, 70 per cent of this energy is produced
by the private sector.

We also saw the distribution sector attracting
investors.

They were - the way the restructuring of the
sectors was done was through long-term concessions,

and so we have about six power distributors
from largely the private sector.

Now, the rural electrification agency continues
with the accelerating rural electrification,

and where access is extended, some of these
areas are again packaged as concessions and

handed over to the private sector to manage.

Right now, we are probably talking of 950
megawatts from the 60 megawatts that I talked

about - a boost of 950 megawatts.

In the next two years, this will more than
double, because we have two hydro-power dams

under construction.

The sector was also structured toff a cost-reflective
tariff, so that the subsidies that government

was putting in were now focused on how do
we increase capacity and access, so that all

Ugandans are able to access an electricity
service?

The service and arrangements to attract more
private sector into the area, we ensured that

it is a feed-in tariff for 20 megawatts or
below, so that this predictability as required

by the private investors was standardised
the power purchase agreement, and also implementation

agreement, so, that the fast-track negotiations
with the private sector.

Of course, in all this, we've seen the customers
increasing to 1.2 million, and the electricity

access is now at about 22 per cent.

We still have a long way to go, but we are
seeing the direction that we are going.

We're now seeing what needs to be done, where
the private sector can come and join us.

So, all this is resulting in too growing demand
for electricity, and whereas the other time

we were chasing capacity, now it's demand
we are chasing because we've been able to

overcome the challenge of capacity.

Now we are chasing demand.

We want industrialisation to take root in
the country.

We have plenty of products we are growing,
and set up value, and so setting up value-additional

industries which will definitely require electricity
throughout the country.

So the government has a programme of setting
up 25 industrial parks across the country,

and that means we must have enough electricity
generated.

We must transmit is across the country, and
be able to distribute and increase access.

And all of this we are doing so that we are
able to ensure that the energy market in the

country is sustainable, and above all, as
I said, the issue of the tariff remains really

pertinent.

My President directed that I don't want manufacturers
to buy electricity at more than $0.05, so

you can see the challenge that is on my shoulders.

In all of this, you can see that the private
sector has definitely come in heavily, and

the government monopolies have been broken,
and so the power markets are actually creating

opportunity for the private sector to participate
with a good return on investment, and therefore,

creating fairness and transparency in the
power markets.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

You see me making a few little hand gestures,
dear panellists, because I'm aware of the

time.

We've got a ministers' lunch, so we are going
to have to end fairly punctually.

I will ask your answers, if possible, to be
pretty brief.

I would like to stay on the topic of new market
access, and Vice Minister, what is China doing

concretely to shape markets and boost the
role of new market actors, and what kind of

vision you have for 
the future in that particular area?

Thank you very much.

There are lots of potential beneficiaries
of the energy transition.

In general terms, we have the whole of society
as a beneficiary.

Everyone stands to benefit from a better environment
and more sustainable development track.

Specific beneficiaries firstly in the clean
energy value chain, every segment of the chain,

in manufacturing, installing, and operation
of clean energy power, equipment, it all stands

to benefit.

In China, there have been more than ten million
jobs provided by solar and wind power sectors,

and there will be more jobs coming from there.

Secondly, I've heard the intervention from
the traditional energy operator.

Traditional energy operators stand to benefit
too.

If we look at coal power plants in China,
there is a concentrated and intensive effort

to transform them into clean coal power plants
with emissions levels and/or lower than gas-powered

gas plants.

If we take the whole of this year and the
whole of next year, we will end up with 77.0

per cent of plants that have come to below
the level of gas-power plants for coal-powered

plants.

That will be an extraordinary achievement.

There are many related companies, including
my friend at Siemens here, who will enjoy

opportunities in that process.

Thirdly, there will be new installations of
equipment in areas around Beijing.

3.5 million homes have been fitted with electric
heating to replace fossil-fuel heating, and

we will be expanding that.

So a lot of producers of related equipment
stand to benefit.

Of course, the traditional he lick electrical
networks - the electrical networks stand to

benefit.

The traditional utilities, the grid in China
has seen a lot of ex-pangs at interconnection,

including the plans to interconnect with neighbouring
countries in the future, and there will be

a significant amount of opportunities to be
enjoyed in that process too.

Thank you very much.

Back to that issue of interconnection across
borders, also in just a moment.

I would like to come first to Minister Al-Kharabsheh
and ask what new business models is seeing

as a result of the energy efficiency programmes
I mentioned earlier, and also in particular,

what kind of public-private partnerships,
local, and international, perhaps, are needed

to further promote innovative approaches on
the market?

Thank you.

Maybe, as I mentioned during my initial remarks,
the electricity sector in Jordan is completely

unbundled.

We have the generation for the private sector.

The transmission, it remains at the hands
of public-owned utility, and the distribution

also for the private sector.

What I think we can do to promote more renewable
energy penetration, going into the issue of

converting our grid to a smarter grid, digitalisation
of the grid, and move maybe from the model

of single buyer to more free market, open
market, so consumers can choose who will be

their suppliers, and the transmission network
as an infrastructure can be utilised and used

by anyone.

What we are trying also to do for more penetration
of renewable energy is to enhance the interconnection

with our neighbours.

We are interconnected with Syria, with the
Palestinian Authority, with Egypt, we signed

an MOU to be interconnected with Saudi Arabia,
and today, I was talking to my colleague from

Iraq.

So, interconnection will promote projects
for the private sector.

Our private sector, and some developers, they
already started talking about the possibility

of setting power plants, solar power plants,
and export that electricity to neighbouring

countries utilising the existing infrastructure.

So, that's very important move benefitting
from the availability of resources in some

countries, and the need for that electricity
in different times during the front peak periods.

I think if we make that move, to create our
infrastructure, convert it into a more smart

network, more and more renewable energy projects,
can come in in reality, and the interference,

or the intervention of the government then
would be minimal.

It would be pure commercial transactions between
the private generators and the consumers.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Perhaps to witness, Minister Søviknes, the
link-up about cross-border trade.

As you say, you're in the position of being
a significant exporter of energy, and I wonder

what market mechanisms you would like to see
put into place in future to facilitate more

effective cross-border linkages?

Thank you.

First of all, we have to bring with us that
the Norwegian and the Nordic countries' electric

market was liberalised in the 1990s, so we
have a couple of decades with experience.

It's extremely important for us as politicians
that we don't pick losers or winners, we there

to yes, give us well-functioning markets,
and, efficient markets, both true regulations,

and true infrastructure, physical infrastructure.

When it comes to the interconnectors, it is
important for the Nordic countries, but it

is also important for the northern part of
Europe.

At the moment, we are building two new interconnectors
between Norway go and Europe - one to the

UK, and one to Germany, the Nordlink.

If you're going to use the potential in this
interconnectors to benefit both Germany, UK,

and Norway, we need a grit on both sides to
be efficient as well.

That's a large question in Germany with the
link between the north and south when it comes

to the electricity.

But, it's important for us to make well-functioning
markets, and use the brights signals, and

we use all companies - the small start-ups,
the big major companies - both within the

energy sector and other sectors to meet the
climate agreement, and to reach the goals.

So, co-operation is a key word between the
governments cross-border, and between governments

and their private sector.

We need an effort from all of us.

Thank you very much.

Did you want to say a word about the emotional
- the emoji that was put up there in response

to your earlier remarks?

I know I would get that reaction from someone.

It is important when we know we are moving
forward and we have the energy transition

that we can add two thoughts in our head at
the same time, because the world needs more

energy, and we have to use both natural gas
and oil, fossil fuels, for several decades

coming up.

It's important to use all tools if the main
goal is to reduce CO2 emissions, and do it

fast, and in a cheap way.

Then a switch from a coal to gas is an important
tool as well.

We can can't just focus on one tool, we have
to use the whole tool box.

Thank you very much.

Speaking of the tools, Cedrik Neike, I would
like to come back to the digitisation issue

that was mentioned before by Mr Staraca because
you spent many years working for Cisco.

I wonder where you see parallel developments
between IT and energy, and whether you think

the energy guys and girl have something to
learn from the techies?

Something to learn from the technologies,
and a - but a lot to learn from the - if you

look at the Telco market that happened, it
created a lot of winners and losers, but in

the end, the consumer won.

But six out of eight manufacturers of the
main manufacturers don't exist any more.

The main major winners were not the classical
utilities or the telecom providers but actually

were the Googles and the Facebooks because
the value was completely redefined.

There are things which we need to learn.

Coming from the Telco sector, I have to say,
I'm partly amazed on how much progress we've

done on the renewables, and partly shocked
on how dumb the network still is.

The network, the telco network used to be
very dumb, and the internet made it intelligent.

The Metcalf law says the more intelligent
end points you have, the more valuable your

network is.

The reality is - I don't know if you know
- is 100% of the transport networks are digitalised

in most of your countries but a maximum of
five to ten per cent of your distribution

networks which means most of the networks,
you only use one or two per cent of the data

when something goes wrong.

So there is so much data which exists in these
networks which is not being used to make is

more stable and efficient, and we have to
address it.

Germany - and that is my call to Germany - did
an amazing job going to the Energiewende.

We went from 19901,000 power plants in Germany.

We now have 1.6 million power producers which
don't consume but also give energy back.

This is a digital problem to be solved, and
we have to solve it.

So, back to your question: transitions always
completely reshapes the value chain, and either

you win or lose and not that you've been successful
in the past.

That counts as much for a company as well
as a company.

We have to forward-invest in this network
because network is actually what is going

to make the energy transition successful or
not.

It is important to do storage, renewables,
important to go to gas - role has a role to

play for quite a while in terms of stable
links in the network - but you need to understand

how energy gets distributed, and how you balance
the network, or the worst thing which is happen

is a black-out - we said it at the beginning
- a black-out, we calculated if Germany would

have a black-out lasting more than a couple
of days, it would be chaos.

We need to think how do we bring digital capabilities,
especially when we build new networks in Uganda,

China, everywhere, that need to be intelligent
to work in a completely more decentralised

logic than the way they intended to.

I hope that answers the question.

thank you.

Very interesting.

Mr Starace, I would like you to introduce
another theme in other sessions, and that

is finance.

There is a growing interest from institutional
investments, asset manages, in sustainable

financial instruments, and I wonder what that
means for conventional or formerly conventional

utilities like Enel, and how you see that
affecting strategy?

I think this is the growth of the ESG sector,
or sustainable finance has been quite dramatic

in the last years.

This has to do, in my opinion, with two things:
the first one, it coincides with the growth

of automated or artificial intelligence.

You say what is the link between this and
that?

There is a link.

That, if you put algorithm in charge of your
investment choices, they do a lot of clever

things, but they can also bring you in very,
very odd situations.

Because algorithms don't understand exactly
human beings, and they don't understand exactly

what happens to sustainability.

It cannot be handled by an algorithm.

Why is there a selective choice?

You minimise the risk of making huge mistakes
when you invest in algorithms.

If you add to that an ESG layer, so, if you
select environmental and social responsibility,

portfolios, and then you let the algorithm
play with those only.

So this is a little bit of a risk mitigation
measure.

It's a bit cynical to say that, but it is
unfortunately the case.

It's a risk-mitigation measure that many portfolio
managers have.

There is a lot of money that does not want
to be associated with unsustainable practices.

It wants to change the world for the better.

I think the second part will prevail over
the years, and it is increasingly large.

The effort that the industry is making is
to, let's say, put down metrics in identifying

tools that can explain in numbers what sustainability
and shared-value creation is, which is not

an easy task, okay?

But so far, we've been quite successful, I
would say, and, if you put at it, if you work

with that, then you also have another benefit
in the company and that is that you focus

the efforts on only sustainable business practices,
so you don't just have an investor relation

function that does sustainability, because
that's fake, but you put the sustainability

down in the line in the shop, whatever you're
doing the job, and that stimulates a lot of

innovation.

It is incredible, the amount of innovation
that coupling sustainability, your business

practices, how much innovation is released
because you need to change the way you do

business if you want to do it sustainably.

We've been in this industry for many, many
years unfortunately - I say "unfortunately"

because I would like to be a little younger!

But I have been in this industry so long,
that I have seen in retrospect myself doing

unsustainable things, only I was not aware
of it, because it was a different era.

Today, we have things that we cannot accept
any more, and how to make sure that the company

which is a huge company, more than 15,000
people, so you cannot go one by one, you have

to put this concept in the heads of people
through a very detailed effort.

After that, then the ESG funds relax, and
they give you their money.

As today, money is so cheap, there's really
no difference.

So, it's not true that there is competitive
advantage from a funding standpoint, at all,

today.

Maybe in the future.

Not now.

In fact, it is just more burdensome, and it
has a little bit of a complication.

But the added value for a company that wants
to stay in business for the next ten, 20,

50 years, that means you have to do sustainable
business practices, that's a big value.

That's a value that we see in there.

That's why we like to go into that direction.

Thank you very much.

Great last words for our panel.

Before we part, I'm going to ask for more
feedback that you may have gleaned?

There was one more final question from the
crowd, if we have time?

This is for Siemens and NL.

What do the panellists think about the huge
imbalance in energy it is?

Is that not a show stopper for efficient use
of electricity among others for heating?

Who likes it is?

Anybody here!

Apart from the finance ministers!

We have a whole panel coming up on carbon
taxes, and we do like carbon taxes!

So, in general, we would like energy to be
relieved from it is, at least to have a uniform

it is across the board.

I think it is is increasingly a large part
of the energy bill of a house, of a factory,

of a commercial centre, of a building like
this.

Whether we like it or not, it's there.

I think it is a direct competitive advantage,
disadvantage, between energy forms, between

businesses across countries, so, a homogeneous
it is at least at energy level - I'm not advocating

a free-tax energy - but at least a uniform
it is will be much better.

It will show the intrinsic competitiveness
of one technology versus another in an easy

way and would be good for the industry.

What about carbon tax??

I think carbon tax is one of the many ways
with which you can push out coal and push

out carbon in general from the mix.

I think it will be difficult to switch to
carbon tax, a system that has never been used

to it, so you have to go through some carbon
costing exercise.

It can be the scheme that you have decided
to implement, so let's go through that, because

if we start discussing carbon tax from scratch,
we will not do anything for another ten years.

My - I would say my easy way out of this is
please let's go through the ETS right away

and not in 2021.

Then, after two or three years, we can switch
to something else because we get used to paying

some carbon cost now.

So far, we're just discussing, and that is
not what I like at all.

I want to talk about tax but also subsidies.

Without subsidies, the green energy technology
would not have been developed the way it is

for wind or solar.

There needs to be support.

We are building the greenest hide general
production in - hydrogen production in Austria.

While I'm not a big subsidy fan, and I want
taxes tonne as low as possible, we need to

see the carbon tax steering investment in
the right direction or not.

Do we need subsidies to kick-start technologies
to go and bridge this value that has been

described?

I think you had another thought on this.

One sentence if you don't mind.

We have a whole panel on carbon pricing and
it is after lunch.

I will be short.

Actually, carbon tax works, especially when
we use it on one sector, as we have done in

Norway.

In 1991 would be we had quite a high carbon
tax on the oil and gas industry offshore.

55 euros per tonne at the moment, and it works.

During the last decade, we have reduced CO2
emissions from the producing of oil and gas,

so that we at the moment have approximately
50 per cent less emissions from the Norwegian

continental shelves compared to other oil
and gas regions in the world.

It is one example of how a carbon tax can
work if it is done properly.

That's what we call a promo for our panel
after lunch.

Many thanks for you, and thank you Janelle
for your input from Twitter and the audience.

Let's thank the Excellencies, the panellists,
for this very, very interesting exchange.

[Applause].


