Good afternoon.

Thank you, Melinda, for that introduction.

Are there still ministers here in the room,
still, state secretaries?

Friends of the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.

I'm glad to see so many people here.

The idea was that I say a few words at the
end.

Due to other obligations, I have to leave
in a few minutes, so I want to use this as

a semi-end.

I've heard you still have a final panel on
stage today.

First of all, I want to see how impressed
I am with the record numbers going up every

year.

This year, 2,000 participants from 19 countries.

It's an increase which is good.

It's not because it is flatters us, it is
good for the cause, because all of you are

here to, some with business interests, but
all of you with a focus on a cleaner world.

Cleaner energy.

And, one of the principles of this conference,
of this getting-together, it's a dialogue.

It is not something where one country comes
and tells another how to deal with Energiewende,

or, in Germany, we have had Energiewende,
and we want to tell people how to do this

- no.

We can give our example, and we listen to
each other, and not one size fits all, so

different countries have different solutions
for it.

We all share a common enthusiasm for clean
energy, and for a transition towards renewable

energy.

And, I don't know how many people of you have
been yesterday at this reward ceremony?

I'm still under the impression of a pretty
awesome evening.

With participation of six or more than that,
but six people, where companies were awarded

start-up award for innovative and dynamic
solutions, totally different.

I still remember one couple, or one company
came up with the idea of having an electricity-free,

or a battery-free, electricity-free refrigerator,
especially for African countries, where you

can store medicine.

You only need a solar panel.

So this was one of the ideas.

Others were - I didn't even grasp what they
did, but it was awesome, otherwise, they wouldn't

have got their prize.

Very smart, very young, smart, dynamic, from
all continents.

And I really, I was impressed by that.

And, by the way, it was a great location,
matching perfectly.

New experience, new world, and even the director,
I don't know whether he's still here?

He was impressed.

That's the way to go forward and participate
yesterday.

I was also impressed to see a number of African
participants, ministers, and state secretaries.

It is remarkable because it's a continent
where you have very little emissions of CO2,

and still, they are very much dealing with
the repercussions of the CO2 emissions.

So, they're not to blame for it.

But, they feel the repercussions from global
warming, to deserts, droughts, lack of water,

lack of food, so that is why they also have
to come up with solutions, and they come up

with solutions.

It's a continent where you have a lot of opportunities
also, because, if you find solutions which

are some people from Kenya, I guess were there,
they came up to find ways to distribute affordable,

sustainable energy solutions for this continent.

So I think wonderful that we have this kind
of opportunity to get together.

Well, having said all this, it's not the end
today, as I said.

It is a good process.

One of the icons of this Energiewende, and
this conference which started a few years

ago, is standing right behind me here.

Of course, it has to be green, sure.

Why it's a sofa, I don't know.

It is an icon now.

This icon came when my last posting was being
an ambassador in South Africa, it was in South

Africa, and it was for the first time I saw
this sofa, and forced me to sit on it, and

made a video clip, and at that time, it was
still fun, or was something, okay, what's

that for?

And, believe it or not, since then, this piece
of furniture has travelled three times around

the world.

124,000 kilometres.

Is this carbon-free, or a footprint, I don't
know?

[Laughter].

It is, good.

Just asking.

[Laughter].anyway, it's travelled a lot.

It is an icon, and it's a place from Macron
- I don't want to mention everybody who has

been sitting there - to stimulate discussions
on Energiewende.

So it's our Energiewende sofa, but before
I talk too much on the Energiewende sofa,

I think we have a small video clip on it.

[Video].

[Applause].

Thank you.

You know what's coming now, of course?

I have to send it off for the next trip to
see it back at least next year at the same

time, but maybe meanwhile, at some conference,
anywhere in the world, maybe in Fiji, or wherever

you might be - I guess you more than me, and
then you will see the sofa again, but if you

don't happen to see it during the next 12
months, you will see it again next year here.

I send it off and put a tag on it which says
"2019".

Yes, let me do that.

[Applause].

Well, without further ado, I want to wish
every one of you a safe travel home, but first,

the day has to be finished here, and we talk
about the future of Energiewende, I guess.

I want to thank everyone for joining us, and
I hope to see you at the fifth energy transition

next year.

Thank you for coming, and a good continuation
of this conference.

Thank you.


