So welcome, everybody.

This is the last session of the day.

We will be talking about power grids, electricity
grids.

Grid infrastructure has been mentioned a couple
of times during the day.

Actually, every single panel somehow has mentioned
the need for good grid infrastructure, and

it is fortunate that we have a full panel
discussing this.

You have headphones.

At the moment, you do not need them.

That's unless you want translation from English
into Chinese.

It may well be that, at a certainly point,
our Chinese speaker may decide to intervene

in Chinese, and you will get the translation.

Good.

So, I will introduce my panellists one after
the other when I ask them to talk.

I would like to start by saying that what
we are seeing, it's a major revolution.

It is not that we are only having a change
in the way we generate, consume, and transmit

electricity, but this transformation is impacting
society at large.

When we are looking at how do we integrate
an increasing share of renewables in the power

sector, we also have to think how can we do
it in a way that it is acceptable to people,

and it is in line with our high interest in
protecting the environment?

So, I would like to start by asking the minister
for energy of Lithuania, and now you will

laugh at my language skill.

Mr Vaiciunas.

What are the key challenges, and the key opportunities
that you are facing in your country in terms

of growing renewable, meeting the climate
target, and, at the same time, keeping people

happy?

Thank you for the question.

Before starting, I would like to refer to
a very nice coincidence that today, we have

this energy conference here in Berlin, and,
in Lithuania, we have so-called the Day of

Energy actually today, and the reason is very
simple, because 126 years ago, in 1892, the

first electric bulb in the street light was
installed.

And, it's even more a nice coincidence that
I'm referring to 1882 when the first street

light, electric street light, permanent street
light, was installed here in Berlin, so just

two kilometres from the place we are sitting
in the Potsdamer Platz.

This is a nice coincidence.

At that time, it was a question of timing
- very important, meaning that three years

after the electric bulb was invented by Thomas
Edison, after three years, it was the first

permanent street light in the world in Berlin.

After ten years, it was the street light in
Lithuania.

So, at that time, timing was very important.

Now, the timing has irrelevance, and the innovation
of technologies, we are moving forward at

a more fast pace.

Talking about challenges, and opportunities,
here, of course, I would like to say very

clearly about the key things, so looking forward
what we have now, the opportunity is the cost,

the reduction of the cost of development.

In recent years, for five or six years, we
see the dramatic reduction of cost for renewables,

meaning for solar panels by 80 per cent, for
the wind technologies by 40 per cent, and,

of course, the market is seeing this.

This is quite quite natural that all the good
things are starting to be implemented at the

strategic level.

I'm glad to say that we're looking forward
to having ambitious national energy strategy,

also to be on the regional scale, but in the
year 2020, we will have 30 pearls of renewables

in our energy mix.

In the year 2030, it will be half of the all
the energy mix will be for renewables.

In 2050, it will be for all energy from renewables.

The opportunities for this are huge.

Talking about the challenges, of course, one
thing is about the integration of renewables,

so that is the challenge of our century, and,
of course, the question is not about only

about the society, this is about also preparedness
of our TSOs, of our regulators to be as flexible

as possible.

Here, sometimes, we need not technologies
are developing but our minds and approach

are to be changed.

Another fact is of course when we are talking
about the opportunities, this is about the

regional co-operation, which is not - we're
not taking enough at the current stands, because

in our experience, regional co-operation was
of key importance.

We build interconnectors with the Nordics
and Poland.

This was a reduction of the prices.

Looking forward on the development of renewables,
this year, we established the Baltic Balancing

Market, a nice opportunity to have a cheaper
cost-efficient balancing of renewables.

Of course, looking forward one of the see
things is about talking about challenges,

this is about sharing of the data, sharing
of the data between the our transmission system,

so, of course, this is a they phenomenon,
a near future that the date of the - the new

oil for the energy companies.

This will be of key importance.

Now we are talking about the all the EU regulations
like the general data protection regulation

and others.

This is of key importance.

But on all this is talking about the opportunities,
this is about regional co-operation, and about

innovations, and digitalisation.

This makes our transition smoother, this makes
our transition even cost-efficient.

Thank you very much.

Basically, you have touched all the points
that we cannot to cover in this panel - collaboration,

innovation, data, markets, connections.

I think it's a good recipe.

Five ingredients, at we have it almost all
- almost.

Lithuania is a small country.

This is an international conference.

I always feel compelled to talk about geography.

We have many different countries that are
represented here.

It's a small country which is is he border
of Europe.

In the Nordic part, and it's bordering with
Russia, so it creates a very interesting electric

island, so to say.

There are some specific challenges in all
island cases, because islands of course have

much more - much higher constraints than if
you are luckily positioned, like Boris, in

the middle of the continent.

So, Boris, Boris Schucht, CEO of 50Hertz,
one of the four German CEOs responsible for

the eastern part of Germany, and proudly operating
a grid with already 53 per cent of the renewable

today, reliable.

How do you move from 53 to have 60?

Because the new coalition is asking you to
speed up.

How are you going to solve the challenges
that were mentioned by the minister?

Thank you, Antonella, dear Excellencies and
ministers, thank you for having me today.

53 per cent share of renewables safely integrated
in the system, because we have, besides that,

also very, very low average interruption duration
in our region - it is below ten minutes nowadays,

which, compared to other regions in the world,
it's tremendous.

So, actually, when you look at 50Hertz's area,
it is a bit kind of a laboratory for the energy

transition and how to integrate high shares
of renewables.

Also, on the other side, we are the proof
that it works with 53.4 per cent, and the

lights are on, and hopefully holding, and
we could see in the last years.

Coming back to your question, first of all,
we have to recognise that renewables are becoming

the really major source, energy source, in
the system, and we have nowadays, when we

look at the auctions in Germany, we have even
under German conditions now three technologies

- photovoltaics, wind, which are fully competitive
to other technologies, and when you look at

system costs compared with gas-fired plants.

It is a development which now by itself is
accelerating.

What does it change?

First of all, when you look back, we had a
system with only a few hundred central power

plants, installations.

Nowadays, a very decentral generation portfolio,
already 1.7 million installations in Germany.

That's the first big change.

The second one is we get more and more active
consumers, so they develop even in the direction

of prosumers - that means consumers who have
a PV installation on their roof and maybe

even a battery in their cellular to - their
cellar to steer their own energy consumption

and bring that together.

Third, big development is the energy consumption
becomes more and more electric.

That means we have seen the panel before,
we are talking about sector coupling, about

immobility of bringing the heat business more
into electricity, so the energy consumption

moves a bit more to electric.

What are now the challenges to these three
developments?

Actually, first of all, we have simply to
steer this much more decentral fleet of generation

power plants safely.

As long as we have only five per cent wind
and solar panels integrated in the system,

you can just forget them if you make mistakes,
and the forecast gets a no, does not really

matter.

As we have nowadays 53 and we come up more,
this becomes more and more a real challenge.

I can tell you, renewables can also take over
system responsibility, so responsibility for

the safety, for the stability of the power
system.

Just a second.

I think this is very important.

Can you just explain it a bit better?

Because we had the first panel, the panel
before ours, concerns about energy security.

And there is still a lot of people that think
that well, you can do a bit of renewable,

but if you go over a certain percentage, you
are in very dangerous water.

Can you explain a bit better how renewables
can take over this system responsibilities?

Of course I can do that.

When you look at an energy system, how does
it work?

In Europe, we believe in the market.

We try to use the market as much as possible
to balance out consumption and generation.

As long as you can't store electricity very
well, you need always to make sure that generation

consumption fits well together.

The TSO is interfering when the market does
not meet the generation, or generation does

not meet exact demand which is not normally
the case because your supplier does not know

when you switch on the light.

That is done by products, for example, like
Control Power, they're called.

Of course, renewable energies have control
power.

We have today a sunny day.

Last year, we had qualified the first wind
installations and PV installations in Germany

that they can deliver negative control power.

As we have so many renewables nowadays that
we already curtail renewables on a daily basis

because peak shaving is an instrument for
integrating them, then, when a windfarm is

peak shaved, so it is curtailed, it can also
offer positive control power.

So the integration of renewables into this
ancillary service and the control of the system,

that's one of the big challenges.

Let me finalise my short entrant statement.

The second one I think is how you organise,
the way the consumer uses the energy follows

partly more intelligently the intermittent
generation.

That means when you have a lot of energy cheaply
in the system, how can you make sure that

the washing machine is running when the sun
is shining, when you have a lot of PV?

That is the second big challenge.

The third big challenge is how can we optimise
a system, a much more complex and decentral

system?

Too few few belief from my side.

Firstly, I think, and we strongly believe
in the market, that means the market should

make the optimisation of demand and supply
whenever you have it, and so it's all about

integrating these renewables, and the new
consumers, the active consumers, into the

market, and that means of more decentral installations.

That means of more digital digitalisation,
that means more innovation, new technologies,

and all this stuff to be able to really to
optimise the system which so many - with so

many market participants.

So, actually, it's about giving these market
participants access to be part of the energy

market, and part of the energy system.

Thank you very much.

Again, a couple of very important points.

Markets as the main driver for stability,
security, and further goal of renewables.

Robert Denda is the head of network and technology
and innovation at Enel, responsible for the

innovation of all of Enel - good job.

How do you relate to what Boris has just said?

So, of course, you are working more or less
on the same parameters of digitalisation and

integration.

What are your key solutions.

Thank you very much.

What Boris just said is very positive in a
sense.

All the debate we have here about the energy
transition is I think still too limited, because

we focus a lot about the first biggest part
which of course is a big driver that is renewable

integration, but it is not all, because the
energy efficiency, the second point of course,

how to become more and more efficient, not
only at the consumer level, but also at the

generation distribution transmission level.

That is I think another important point that
adds complexity, but also brings opportunities

I think another completely different line
that needs to be integrated is sustainability.

I think that's another point.

How can we make sure, because here of course,
if we speak about German industrialised countries,

the situation is also very different.

Maybe from other parts of the world, so, here
we speak about how to give access to all of

the people in the world, basically, to energy.

On the other side as well: How technically
to reduce and minimise, optimise, the grids

in the transmission, in the perimeter that
I speak of - distribution grids - in order

to reduce the losses?

That's maybe another very important point
to take into account, if we consider a reduction

of one per cent of technical losses within
the grids, of course, we are reducing one

per cent of the overall energy exported through
those grids.

That's a huge impact if you think about it,
if you make the calculations, and I think

that's another very important aspect that
I think on top of course, the difficulties

of integration of renewables.

In terms of renewable integration, I also
- I think I'm quite aligned in the sense that

I see more and more distributed generation.

If we take the case of one of our eight countries
where we are in Italy, here, we have over

700,000 points and users that are also actively
generating in the grids in the medium voltage

and low-voltage grids.

If you actually look at the numbers, almost
all of them are generating in the low-voltage

grid.

Actually, the complexity is completely shifting,
and I think that is something that needs to

be taking into account.

Of course, there is complexity at the high-voltage
grid, we have complexity on the medium volt

tackle grid, and both I think are quite well
known already, and had an evolution over the

past, and now what we add is a different level
of complexity in the low-voltage grid.

This is also where -
Sorry, are you - your DSO's colleagues, deal

with this level of complexity at the low-voltage
grid?

What we do is basically - just to add - just
for full understanding why the low voltage,

because, on the low voltage also, the electrification
of everything, the electrification of - electrification

of transport and mobility as well.

Yes, we're working on it.

It is a digitalisation road map.

What Enel did already many years ago, we started
putting digital technologies, creating smart

grids.

We started now 17 years ago with the full
roll-out of smart metres in Italy, for example.

We have distribution automation in place in
the medium voltage grid.

Now we speak about an absolutely tremendous
technological improvement disruption in those

technologies.

Today, to give you one example, the technologies
to do real time self-healing in the medium

voltage grid take less than one second in
order to identify the fault, and to reconfigure

the grid in order to isolate as much as possible
the customers from that faulty section, and

those technologies that you need in order
to do an integration of renewables, and the

full electrification of society in an efficient
way.

You need to put digital technologies in there.

Here, I think, in our case, we fully believe
in smart meters, as of course one element

that you have to measure - smart meters at
the grid edge.

We also put meters in the grid.

You need to control elements inside the grid.

The interesting thing that know goes ahead
towards the low-voltage grid - let's say the

meters are already there - but the distribution
automation.

The next years will go more and more towards
the low-voltage grid.

Here, on that point, I think I agree with
what has been said before: the critical point

is today, and will be, the data flows, how
to manage, let's say, the technical data,

because here we are not speaking of consumption
data, let's say, for billing or the customers,

we speak a lot about technical data that grid-relevant
data that can be transferred, that can be

useful because the customer uses storage,
has maybe an electric vehicle has a rooftop

solar panel, and all of that in combination
give already use case for the customer, but

can also make a very relevant use case for
the DSO.

Those are things we need to construct in the
energy system.

Thanks a lot.

As you mentioned, by 2030, half of your electricity
will be from renewable energy sources.

Are you sometimes worrying about energy security
in such a very near future?

Shortly, because we continue the round.

>> Not in 2030 but energy security.

The reason is not only about renewables.

Renewables, this is the - we have a good infrastructure
in principle, which is capable to have additional

capacities of renewables, to be twin powered,
to be photovoltaics.

The question is broader.

The fact that we are functioning in the electricity
market together with the Nordic states but

still in the system which is managed 

by Russian endeavours.

We are moving very fast, and I hope this year,
after two months in June, we will have the

political agreement, and this project will
be just the technical side to ensure our ... from

the Russian networks, and the desynchronisation
of the Russian networks.

It will be easier then to go forward to integrate
renewables, because now, it's also, it's two

challenges.

One of the challenges renewables, integration.

Another one is our system security.

Thank you very much.

So, integration is also a function of solidarity
with your neighbour.

We will come back to that.

Now we move to the next speaker, and I will
exercise my Chinese language at the moment.

I would like to introduce Mr Zhengyun Sun,
Chief Information Officer of State Grid, China.

State Grid is probably the largest company
in the world with 1.72 million employees.

We visited State Grid in January, and I was
really impressed.

Can you please tell us China has done huge
changes in the energy mix, very aggressive

policies for supporting renewables, also for
meeting the climate target, very important

role in the international community.

So, we have been discussing about the importance
and the role of markets.

Can you tell us something on how State Grid,
China, such a big company, can help to implement

well-functioning markets so that renewables
can really grow and prosper as it is wanted?

Thank you.

The renewables are really very big challenge
for the accommodation of the - for the operation.

In the technicality and in the market.

The market, the state security has a treating
centre.

A long-term, medium term, and a very short
term trading of electricity.

For the long-term trading, for every power
plant, they have a base electricity.

The power we put in the market for short-term,
that they had, with the treaty.

It is unified, so, from the national ... 
and the provincial, and, that the unifies,

that it can't co-ordinate the treaty.

The ... and the user can't compete in the
platform.

We use a digitisation to realise the market
mechanism to make it fair.

At the very beginning, the operators pressure,
we put public the transmission reserve, yeah?

Everybody's meters, and the customers know
which transmission line has the how much capacity.

That is ... the situation.

At the same time, we are starting the service.

Everybody knows that renewables, it's very
good, because it is - but in the current operation,

because big fluctuation of the transmission.

So, for the every power plant, we will bid
in the market and the unified - it will function

very well.

Only about the market, the renewable accommodation,
I think technical technology, the know-how

is very important, because the big fluctuation,
as things a big capacity on the grid, it is

important.

The bigger the capacity on the grid, the big
tolerance to the fluctuation of the grid,

of the renewables, and also the big capacity
or transmission.

In China, the renewables are located mostly
in the west region, and in the centre, this

is about 1,000 to 3,000 kilometres away, so
the State Grid how they develop it, cutting

edge which higher wattage technology that
is - a thousand was the.

800 - 800watts.

10AC voltage transmission, the high wattage
transmission for the important role for the

renewables in the regions throughout China,
that can transmit to the east or centre of

China.

Most of the renewables combine with the coal
generation, combine together to transmit with

the load.

Thank you very much.

There is a very clear policy in peak coal.

No new coal power plants will be built in
China in the near future, and already, today,

you have a very high level of curtailment
which means over capacity, essentially.

How do you deal in the coming years with this
over capacity?

I find this very interesting, the problem
of over capacity, because we shared the same

problem in the US.

We have a lot of capacity.

In Europe, we have over capacity.

In China, we have over capacity.

In the rest of the world, on the other hand,
we have increasing demand, and so it's much

easier to add renewables, because you don't
have to kick things out.

In our part of the world, we need to have
a phase-out strategy and maybe you want to

say something about that.

The world capacity, the customer, the renewables,
it is, a province, because, the transmission

limit.

In Shanghai go and the western Province, the
renewables, you're also limited because of

the transmission, and the big fluctuation,
so that is also limited, but now we are studying

the technology of our renewables.

We have to protect in ... city.

It's a renewable of wind power, and photovoltaic
and storage, with new renewable power plant.

Working very well, and has been in operation
for several years.

Oral capacity as in the - for the power plant,
it is for the power plant, ... by the government.

Thank you very much.

So, very often, we think that we live in completely
different realities, when you come to this

conference, this is advertising the event,
but it is an event that is happening everywhere

in the world, and this is really useful to
learn from each other.

We are going to learn from the Nordic with
Bente Monica Haaland, senior executive Vice-President,

of Statnett, and board member at the Renewables
Grid Initiative.

What is your experience in the Nordic?

Nordic was the first electricity market to
be set up, and now you are also one of the

first areas where you've developed collaborative
approaches.

Can you tell us a bit about that?

I would really like to talk about the Nordic
model that we usually call it.

The Nordic countries have a long tradition
of co-operating.

First, we started building strong grids cannot
countries, and also between the countries.

Both AC and CD lines.

The first AC lines from Norway to Denmark
was in 1974.

The region is closely linked together with
strong grids.

Then we established the exchange.

Sweden and Norway from 1996, and then all
the countries was in like Denmark, Finland,

Norway, and Sweden, from the year 2000.

We have a long history of co-operation on
grid development, and also market development.

This has proved to be a very good model.

In Norway, where I come from, 40 per cent
of all the hydro-power production is in the

distribution grid, so we have a meshed system,
and we have all renewable system, and a long

tradition that this is working.

I think the three elements, the key elements,
in the in order model is that - in the Nordic

model is that we have strong grids, a well
functioning market, and a good co-operation

between the TSOs and all the players in the
market.

Going forward, these three factors played
a big role going forward.

We found that the in the three countries,
the power change is changing.

From 2010 to 2025, the amount of wind power
in the Nordics will be four times as high

from 2010, and we will double the interconnector
capacity, the DC capacity out of the Nordic

countries.

At the same time, the nuclear power plants
in Sweden will be reduced, and also, the coal

power plants will shortly be turned down in
Denmark.

So the whole power system is changing.

We need to cope with this, and the four TSOs
recently just in March this year signed a

new agreement on how to deal with these changes,
because we need to balance the system in a

new way, and we also need to co-operate in
a different way to find new solutions to the

common challenges.

Two years ago, the four TSOs, wrote this report
called The challenges in the Nordic Power

Systems.

We sat down to agree on what are the key challenges
looking forward.

Tomorrow, you can find the report where all
the solutions to the challenges are suggested.

That is a road map pointing out what to do
in the system operation, market solutions,

power grid development, and also solutions
to supply the solution that is are necessary

to meet the challenges that we see.

We need to collaborate in all these areas,
both the TSOs, but also on the political side,

the high-level political side, and also in
each country, the TSOs, and the DSOs.

Robert mentioned before this digitalisation,
and the fact that most of the renewable integration

is happening at low voltage.

How do you handle the collaboration between
DSOs and TSOs.

Not in all countries - Boris is getting along
very well with his DSOs, but this is not always

the case across the globe.

Is there some lesson from the Nordic on how
to construct and collaborate TSOs and DSOs?

Each country has their own strategy or plan
for creating the data hubs.

Nor which, we have at the end of the project,
and the data hub, collecting all the data

from the smart meters, will be finished in
February next year.

And then Denmark, in Sweden, and Finland have
their projects which will be finished in the

next few years.

This is also explained in this report.

At first, we need to find solutions at home
how to deal with the data.

When all the data hubs are working fine, we
have to find a solution in order to share

the data so that we can have a good ICT solutions
from the top of the customer's data.

But that will be the next step.

In Norway, we just had this project with Statnett
where ten of the companies looked together

the DSO and TSO challenges - how are we going
to do the bottlenecks in the system, what

and investigate what are the key challenges
and how to solve this going forward.

This is a big discussion, and this is a process
that we need to do in common.

There was a mobile phone telling us that maybe
I should ask Boris, do you have a special

recipe on how to deal with the DSOs?

How do you overcome sometimes the perceived
conflict of interest?

It is a difficult point because there are
certain conflicts on the question of who is

responsible for what.

The system of the future looks very different
than the system where we have today, and I

will give you an example.

Let's, for example, take immobile.

Immobile, we - immobile, you can have as many
cars as you want to.

On the DSO grids, on the low-voltage grids,
that's a completely different cup of tea.

When you do it in a stupid way, so just allowing
that everybody charges at the evening at eight

o'clock when he comes home, at the same time
the evening peak, and the system is there,

and there is no PV any more, then it means
you can only integrate two to five, or ten

per cent of the cars that we have today on
an electric basis.

Otherwise, when you want to integrate more,
and you do not do it smartly, then you would

create a huge new investment in DSO grids
in the last mile.

That costs society unnecessarily a huge amount
of money.

Therefore, it makes a lot of sense to bring
intelligence in there for this local congestions,

actually, to allow some somehow the different
system, you can be more market orientated,

or more regulatory based, that not everybody
charges at the same time.

When you do it in an optimal way, you can
see that every household in Germany could

have four cars statistically without any need
for further investment in the grid.

That shows how big this range is.

When you have now electric cars integrated,
they can also participate in giving, in a

solution for global congestions.

We have on the high-voltage line a congestion,
and we need to make sure that both, the DSOs,

and TSOs have access to the flexibility that
that new technology in the system offers.

That's, for example, one of the challenges,
and then of course, it is always a question

who is responsible for what?

I would say that it is more or less a good
competition on ideas between different institutions,

on the end of the day, we are both responsible
to do that in a serious manner in the optimal

way for the society.

We will come back to that I'm sure and I see
Robert.

Now it's time to introduce Katherine Hamilton,
chair of the public policy, called 38 Solution.

At the same time, she's also co-chair of the
Council for the Future of Energy at the World

Economic Forum where we met, actually.

Very nice to meet you again.

We have been talking about smart meters, smart
charging, smart solutions.

What about smart humans?

We haven't yet talked about smart humans.

This is part of what you're council did which
is to think about how do we go to an energy

transition of a low-carbon future?

How do we phase down fossil, create good policy,
make sure that everybody has access, and what

are the key human elements to this?

Because we ignore them at our peril.

The first chunk of human issues would be to
me engagement.

We've talked a lot about this - the internet
of things - and, as Boris said, humans can

be a resource.

A prosumer can be a resource in addition to
being a load.

Consumers are used to being connected.

Everyone, even developing countries, are having
smart technologies - smartphones by which

they run their business.

People don't think of them as phones, they
think of them as their business.

They think of them as control, choice, and
an ability to interact with the system, to

interact with others.

Utilities are pretty slow to get that going,
and to make sure that consumers really have

those choices, and yet, it's so powerful,
and we have to think about that more intentionally.

So that is the connected piece of it.

The second piece is the fact that, when we
go through this energy transition, there are

a lot of people being left behind.

In the US, the whole coal industry has been
left behind.

Those workers 
in the areas rich in coal don't have jobs

- also rich in solar and wind - but we haven't
thought about that intentionally: I think

it is something we cannot lose track of is
that there are winners and losers but we don't

want people to lose, because, when you get
disenfranchised, then you start turning against

the very system that you need to be a part
of.

So, I think we have to think about workers
in transition.

; we have to think about the utility sector
and a lot of workers who are ageing.

How do we get young people not just interested
in building disruptive apps but interesting

coming to work in the sector as part of this
new cool new energy transition and being part

of creating energy access and making sure
humans are involved.

In my mind, it is the connectivity part where
people can engage more, but there's the part

where people have become disengaged in.

Those are the workers left behind, and we
need to think about that intentionally.

We talked about "prosumers", is this a way
to engage people, get them more interested

and active?

People aren't that interested in energy.

They are interested in their lifestyle.

What makes sure they keep track of their kids,
crops, or their business, whatever it is they're

thinking about on a daily basis that does
not have to do with energy?

It has to do with their lives.

How do we get them to care?

We give them solution that is are services
- we give them solutions that are services.

In areas where there are a lack of jobs, you
still need the ability for people to engage,

and trying to bring those new technologies
in.

Technology is still for consumers pretty cost-effective.

It's not very expensive to get a phone that
you can - people will buy phones before they

buy a battery.

So I think that's how you're going to enable
people is that you don't create it in the

service of making sure that your DSO and TSO
operate efficiently, but instead allow consumers

to be part of something that's more than energy.

Thanks a lot.

I always try to bring the humans in these
energy discussions because, without them,

we don't need electricity!

How do you involve your voters, not just consumers?

That's a very good question, because, before
answering your question, I think that the

key challenge for us today is that we are
not talking about two different systems of

the centralised system, with very clear lines,
and clear responsibility of the generators.

Transmission system operators, distribution
system operators, and the consumers.

We are talking about not only about a decentralised
system but also the transition toward that

system.

So this challenge is like a double, because
this transition, it needs also more technical

preparedness.

Talking about the voters, here is the quite
important question, because now, also, in

- we are creating a scheme for the prosumers.

Of course, this is quite a similar scheme
what we have in Europe, but, in principle,

doing this process, it is a challenge, also
for the consumer to behave in a different

way than it was before.

Because, we can create the best system on
having a small - small it on your roof.

You can have less bureaucracy.

You can have incentives.

We can have the system which is user-friendly
for the consumer, but the key question is

the consumer as such should be well-informed
about his capacities and capabilities.

That is the question that the consumer also
should think not only about today's benefits

being a consumer, but also tomorrow, about
the benefits for tomorrow, what he will have.

This is not only about the payback period
of solar power, for example, but also about

their possibility to be the master of your
home - to be a master of the terrorist which

you're consuming.

That's quite important factor, and that's
the responsibility not only of the politicians,

not only of the transmission system, or the
system operators, or the regulators, this

is the joint work of all of us.

I think that in case the consumer wouldn't
be involved in this system, this transition

from a centralised system to that centralised
system, it will be more easy to go forward.

So I can agree with that, but in this digitalised
race, do we really need people to think, or

just we need a chip?

Robert, you talked about digitalisation, and
I would like to hear from the others.

Can't we digitalise all of this and the machine
will start when it starts, and, when you receive

a signal, and therefore we need real time
pricing?

How do you see the world coming up?

The tendency is there.

Let's say the machines speak to each other,
and of course, home automation, if you think

about storage integration, all of this at
some point, you need a certain time of real

time communication.

I think what is very important in this, is
we should not mix the things.

Let's say, on the one side, I think it is
very important that the customer, the establish,

at the end has the right to choose what he
wants to do, how he want to use the energy

for what reason the energy is used.

On the other side, there's the opportunity
of integrating on the technology side the

different elements in order to facilitate
everything, basically, that we spoke about

here today, including the whole energy transition.

The digitalisation as a trend is not stoppable.

We see it as the customers and the citizens
many times are even further ahead with their

digitalisation.

If you look at the home what they digitalised.

Maybe we should talk about automation rather
than digitalisation?

This is almost the next step?

No, you digitalise, and you automate?

It's a previous step, or part of the digitalisation.

If we look at the grids, what we did first,
let's say we put smart meters and optimised

the management of the distribution grid.

Maybe I can tell the audience that Enel was
the first one to deploy smart meters, but

everyone is thinking that those smart meters
were pretty stupid!

So let's see.

I hope that's not everybody!

What is true, of course, is that being the
first player, it is a risk you always have.

We did this in the year 2000, we started today.

We are deploying our third generation of smart
meters, and we are operating 44 million smart

meters.

I would not say they're stupid, because they
-

How many smart meters did State Grid deploy?

400 million.

This is incredible.

They play an important role in the service
to our customers.

We know a lot of information, habits of the
users.

We can serve them better.

I'm asking all of you, actually.

Are you going to use smart meters to move
into the real-time pricing, or different-time

type of electricity pricing?

If you look at the Spanish market, for example,
there is the complete dynamic prices for those

that have not changed to the liberalised market.

These are millions of customers that use our
lead values.

They use basically - basically, they are billed
with the wholesale price of the day-ahead

market with a delta of the commercialisation
part, and they use - and the only way of doing

this is smart metering.

This sun, say, one key factor.

In the Italian side, we capture 50-minute
curves for the customer, so, dynamic, all

types of dynamic schemes can be produced on
that.

There are some, for example, some retailers,
let's say certain hours of the week that the

customer can choose are, for example, for
free.

These type of offers can only be billed if
you have, let's say, a real consumption.

We will see more and more, this.

Katherine, do you think the dynamic pricing
is a fundamental step to get a response, even

efficiency, flexibility?

Definitely.

I think we're ready for that in the sector
now that we have smart grids and we know more

what to do with the gazillion bytes of data.

Regulators won't let consumers be overcharged.

They're very concerned about making there
are fair prices for consumers.

The issue is how do you make that consumers
are ready to respond to this?

I think since we have tolls, surge prices
on Uber, consumers are used to thinking more,

and the commercial and industrial sector has
been doing this for years, consumers on a

residential level are thinking about I will
have to pay more for this if I do it at a

certain time.

I think we're ready for that, but I think
we have to make it really easy.

People have to be able to put in their preferences.

I have four kid.

Nobody's going to tell me when I do my laundry.

I'm going to do it when it gets this high.

I will pay the surge price.

The issue is consumers have to to have it
really easy.

They have to have all the information they
need to make those choices, and then the utilities

have to know what they are, so that they will
know what to expect on the grid.

Very good.

I would like to invite Janelle with the questions
from the Twitter community.

We've selected two questions.

First up, we have Mr Markus Müller.

What do you think about grid-boosters?

So large-scale BSS operated by grid operators.

Highly topical, in a winter package, ownership
of storage for TSOs.

Completely different from the market approach
Mr Schucht just praised.

Shall I go to the next one?

This question is, "Question to the Minister
Vaiciunas and Ms Haaland.

Should the Nordic grid be expanded 
to -

Explain what grid boosters are.

One of the big challenges in Germany is the
energy transport from the north to the south

because most of the wind power is in the north
of Germany, but the consumers centres are

in the south and the west, and, as everybody
knows, acceptance is one of the big challenges.

One of the ideas is to leave the classic way
of n minus 1 security.

We keep the rest for the n-1 community, that
means when the rest of the tower falls, the

rest of the system can take over in the millisecond
of the energy supply.

Of course, you can technically do it differently
by big batteries on the one side, and power

electronics on the other side.

It is digitalisation with high voltage.

To have a big battery, and the battery then
replaces that line in this millisecond when

the line, is, for example, by an incident
interrupted.

For that, you can utilise 25 per cent of your
roughly 25 per cent of your transport capacities.

I think we will go in this direction.

It's one of the clear innovative tasks for
us as the TSOs in central Europe to develop

the needed technologies, together with the
suppliers, and we are committed to that, and

we are on the road to that, so, in ten, 15
years, we will see these elements in the grid,

and I'm pretty sure that technology will be
developed.

Do you already have this technology in China?

Do you know about that?

Because the storage is a big, very, very big
problem.

For a big capacity.

You know, we have to protect only a small
capacity, that is 17 megawatts.

That means for the renewable combination,
winter, solar, and the storage.

For the bigger capacity, I think it's only
the storage, yes.

So this booster will reduce the need for grids?

Yes, it will not be cheaper, but it will reduce
the need for grids.

Hopefully, it gets a bit more public acceptance.

I hope you're a bit faster than 15 years,
then!

Bente, let's say you are from Norway.

Can you maybe bring back to the Nordic the
idea of including Lithuania in your market,

or how do you see that?

I'm sure there's been a lot of discussion
about this option.

There are big discussions.

I think it is a good corporation as well.

As far as I know, you're looking towards the
Continent to synchronise the systems.

But I agrees guess that - I guess that we
will have discussions between the countries,

and also in the - on these questions?

I think that always the stories involving
in stages, so, just remember 2011, when the

Baltic States were declared that this is the
energy island.

At that time, we had only one interconnection
- Estonia-Finland interconnection with the

Nordics, so that was in 2011.

Then, in 2000, at the beginning of 2016, we
increased our integration with Nordics, market

integration, by the interconnection of Lithuania
and Sweden, so, now, we are integrated into

the Nordics market, and we are benefitting
from this market.

We are really thankful for this co-operation,
not only on infrastructure, building jointly,

but also having all these instruments.

I mean, and so on, this was beneficial for
our markets.

That's the clear message that all our consumers
now are benefitting from the being the part

of the in order genetic market.

- of the Nordic market.

Now they talk about the future of the integration
of our systems.

This is different question than the market
one.

And this is purely a technical question, to
know that it was the debates for like two

years before about, for the Baltic States
to be synchronised with the Nordics or with

the continental European networks to Poland.

This question is already practically solved,
having in mind that now we have for the market,

we have DC connections, and, for the system
integration, we need to have AC connections.

And that is the key difference.

So, now this question has been resolved, all
the three Baltic States agree that the only

technical and economic rational way to synchronise
is towards continental European networks through

Poland.

Just now, we are finalising the two studies,
and it will be the question about what could

be the technical elements to synchronise with
the continental European network.

So I believe that this third step of integration,
not only market integration will be finalised

soon.

Very good.

This points me to the fact that actually,
we need to collaborate.

We need to collaborate across the voltage
level but we also need to collaborate with

our neighbours.

This is probably one of the key messages that
I want to deliver from this panel that collaboration

is a must if we really want to progress in
the best possible way.

Now, in the previous panel, I believe it was
the Polish speaker, the Polish deputy minister,

who said we need storage, storage, storage,
storage.

I would like to challenge this, and I would
like to hear from you.

Do we really need storage, storage, storage,
or do we rather need flexibility where storage

is one important component of flexibility?

And we start with Katherine because I see
she's been jumping on that.

I was working on storage since the 1980s.

I call storage the "bacon of the grid" because
it makes everything better.

I don't eat bacon but a lot people like bacon!

Storage is just an energy management tool,
right.

It can be anything.

Storage can be water, a battery.

Storage can just be a system.

It can be mass.

It can be anything.

It is just an energy management tool.

So I feel like the issue is flexibility.

And the issue is response.

So we need to be able to have response in
real time.

If that means - a system that is fully connected
and Boris talked about this, how you can manage

solar and wind off each other in combination
with demand response, with efficiency, with

consumers engagement, I mean, storage is important.

I think we've gotten to the point where it
is certainly in the States become much more

cost effective, and I think it will continue
to be such, and it will continue to be a key

part of this system as everything is, but
I think it is the flexibility that we want,

woo we have to be able to compensate.

We need to be able to pay the services that
all of those different flexible resources

provide to the grid in order to continue to
make them viable and cost-effective.

I think that there is another solution, that
the grid, a large service area, and large

installed capacity for the contingent.

The second contingent of the grid, we use
a ... we need protection.

According to the specific constitution the
area grid, if the big trunk transmission,

there is an imbalance between two areas, so,
one area is the trip of the load, automatically.

We have a contract with the users.

Another area that is our - the generation,
we - it is also balancing.

We have many, many protections because a large
area of - and a large installed capacity.

Maybe one additional comment: All our calculations,
and all our studies have shown, in the central

European environment, you can say you can
integrate up to 70 per cent, something in

this range, maybe thinking about additional
flexibility or storage.

You have the flexibility by the additional
gas power plants that you have anyway.

There are complementary power plants.

All our calculations from us, or the independent
institutions show that we have currently in

Germany, there is a debate on increasing the
target for 2030 to 65 per cent, and, in our

calculations, this comes now close to the
point where you have to start to think about

storage.

We're not ready yet with all this analysis,
but it seems that this is somewhere the range

where you have to start think about.

As long as you're below that, it's a very
expensive solution.

There are much cheaper solutions.

Of course, this is geographically defined.

If you are in Spain, in Italy, Portugal, and
Lithuania also, then probably you need it

a bit earlier.

It depends on how well interconnected you
are.

If you are on an electric island, you need
flexibility much earlier.

I know you want to talk but I have to topics
that I want to cover still, and time is running.

You can talk about any of the two, or, if
you really want, about something else.

I would like to talk about electrification,
and not just pleasing of transport but the

- but the broad electrification.

If we say it will continue, the demand for
renewables will continue, we will live in

a close to zero marginal cost of electricity.

If this is the case, we can really start thinking
about what are the processes that we can electrify.

Some reflection on this.

The other topic for you to pick: how do we
design great tariffs in a way that are fair,

acceptable, and still stimulating the required
investments?

So, I see everyone is now less keen, but grab
the microphone and go ahead.

I want to say something about the storage.

The previous point!

Now it's too easy!

I will say something about the electrification,
then.

I think that here, the electrification of
everything is a shift towards electricity

as the source is a trend that is happening.

So the question is maybe different.

The question is maybe how to integrate this
now, and for this, we come back again.

I think the technologies are there, the technologies
are becoming sufficiently cost-effective to

do that.

And so what needs to be done, and this depends
again on the geography, it is let's say to

take the right actions, because in some cases,
it is probably the best scenario is to invest

in a certain part, and, in other parts, let's
say you need to invest in another part of

the market.

I think that's the key.

At the end, I think we will all see that grids
need to be digitalised in order to allow for

that electrification, at distribution and
transmission level.

The home itself as well.

: this is a trend that is unstoppable.

If you bring all of this together, the key
of the regulator at also the market to make

sure that this happens in the most cost-effective
way.

Now, you talk about digitalisation.

I think this is your main topic.

What about cyber security.

Are you not afraid of that?

Of course, cyber security is a point that
needs to be taken into the beginning from

design.

We spoke a little bit about the data that
needs to be transferred in order to make this

electricity system of the future work.

Of course, it needs to be based on open protocols;
it needs to be based on cyber-secure mechanisms

there.

It is clear, of course.

It is a concern, and I think it is a concern
for all the players, and it needs to be taken

into account from the beginning.

Now we have three topics.

The electrification, the how do we make fair
and great tariffs, and cybersecurity.

We enlarging the discussion.

We can stay here until dinner!

Who takes the next one?

I would like to talk about grid tariffs.

We have this big discussion now in Norway,
because we see from the transmission grid

that the tariff will be three times as high
as in 2012.

Just within a couple of years.

And, at the same time, the distribution grids
are investing a lot, and also, you need to

pay taxes on the top of the tariffs, so we
see a big discussion in Norway now how to

deal with this, because nobody wants to pay.

And, it is the end-users that will end up
with the bill, and this discussion is quite

difficult, I think, because it's all about
the energy - you need to rebuild the grids,

you need to invest, but the model that we
see today, it is only like the end-users that

have to pay.

Sorry, are we not creating the problem ourselves?

Because transmission and distribution remain
a share of the total energy bill.

Generation is more expensive still.

Are we not creating this in the mind set of
the consumers?

That this is expensive, and we cannot afford
it?

I see that the energy price is getting lower
and lower, so the part of the bill from the

grid is getting higher, and this is quite
difficult to understand.

So, I think we need to explain this to make
a narrative, to explain, because, the bill

is not that high come - because the bill is
not that high to expenses that you do have

as a customer.

I don't think people understand how the bill
is really designed and what you pay for.

We in the energy sector need to explain this
in a better way.

Also, make sure that the grid, the tariff
is paid by more than just the end-users.

We see in Norway today that 50 per cent of
the cost of the investments in grid is caused

by new production, but they have a limitation
in how much they can pay for the tariffs given

by the EU, so I think this is a challenge
that we need to discuss, how to deal with

this going forward, otherwise, I don't think
we will have public acceptance for all the

constructions that we need to do in order
to reach the targets.

So this is a challenge for all policymakers
to think it through and think it through probably

together with the industry and society.

And the energy taxes on the top of it, so
it is the whole package in the bill that we

need to look at in a new way.

Anyone else on this topic?

One more quick point on storage, if you get
seasonal storage, it will take care of 30

per cent.

I hate to see us leaving potential solutions
on the table, so I want to make sure - or

taking them off the table, which is fuel cells,
hydrogen, BHP, hydro-mass, geothermal, I hope

in the rush to electrify and put in batteries
that we don't leave value behind.

When you think of value, the utilities in
the US, a lot of them, are not competitive,

they're not deregulated, so, for us, performance-based
rates are going to be really important to

move to rather than cost-of-service rates.

What that does is that creates for the utility
a sense of needing to provide a service to

the customer, and make sure that their performance
can be rated on any number of metrics - could

be rated on CO2, or unreliability, or on cybersecurity
preparedness.

You can create whatever metrics you want.

Utilities themselves have said we would rather
that our ability to change our business model

based on performance rather than based on
cost of service.

I think you will see a change.

So markets and performance, and fairness,
politics.

Boris, do you want to say something about
cybersecurity?

This is -
Maybe one because we are talking about digitalisation,

and digitalisation is one of the big keys
for successful energy transitions.

I think we all belief nowadays in that.

Cybersecurity is I think one of the big challenges
ahead of us.

I'm not so much afraid, because the governments
are heavily working on that to define on how

the IT should be certificated on the TSO,
generator side, but I'm more afraid for what

happens behind the meter.

I have a rather nice i3, I looked on my app,
so I can charge and discharge it via my iPhone.

So many i3s are not driving on the road, when
somebody has this app, you can switch off

the whole energy system.

So these are all applications which are outside
of the control of the energy system, and of

the parties involved in the energy system.

We see more and more of these applications.

To give you an example, Samsung can switch
off all TVs which are connected somehow with

VLAN with this system, because it is a huge
amount.

It has an impact.

The converters of PV installations, one big
company who is producing them, they are also

all connected to the internet, and they could
be hacked and switched off.

This is one question that we have really to
answer more than we do today.

We find we have to find answers on that with
the more digital world, and the more digital

approach, and the energy system, we have to
find an answer on cybersecurity, which we

do not have yet.

And we will not have it for some time because
this is such a fast ...

... 

I would like to take a statement, closing
remark, whatever you want to say, and then

we will invite Janelle to get - is Janelle
coming back on stage or not?

We don't take questions any more.

So, okay.

We take a statement from each of you.

Then we shall see what happens next.

Maybe, we start with you, because you've been
too quiet, I understand, the challenge of

the language.

I nightmare you on this panel, I must say!

Also, I would like to say something about
the cybersecurity.

It's really a big challenge for the utilities,
because the digitalisation, it is in the transport

for the utilities for the grid operation,
customer service.

And we have done a lot of work into two aspects.

One is for the grid operation, and the system,
the digital company, isolated from the outside.

We have dedicated communication that dedicated
RTO, and dedicated a centralised computer

for the DMS system.

For the manager, for the service, we have
tried many schemes, and many mixed schemes,

and we have also a team - two teams.

One is R&D, one defends R&D to make a success
to find some problem with the network.

That's what we have done.

That's really a big problem because the digitalisation
is indispensable for us.

That's all.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Of course, this is a very hot topic, not just
for you but for everybody.

Yes, please?

I think just I would like to turn to the interest
of the consumers, so, first of all, probably,

this is the question concerning the electrification.

Always, the consumers has an interest of security
of supply.

It will be a supply without their intermittency.

The next thing is the prices - talked about
dynamic pricing.

The third is the comfort.

The electricity and the technology are good
at transferring these challenges, and this

interest of the consumers.

So, I really believe that we have no other
choice, just electrification.

New current energy.

That's for the electrification, and, of course,
this is the question of the cybersecurity.

We are talking about it as a possible threat,
but this is actually the facts.

It is taking place, for example, been in Lithuania
last year, we had from all the cyberattacks,

37 per cent was in the energy sector.

If means we're under attack but we are also
solving these questions.

And then you have challenges - when you have
challenges, you're becoming more stronger.

We are answering to this.

For example, in our new energy strategies,
it is now in the parliament, we made it very

clear, for the consumers, not only affordable
prices, not only security of supply, not only

renewable energy, but also cybersecurity is
very important, and this is in the strategy,

and moving forward with the tactical measure.

In Lithuania, we have NATO security centre
of excellence which is working also on the

cybersecurity things, and that's in our agenda.

I that, in case - the life is dynamic.

All the new entering into the electrifications
is making also new challenges.

So let's turn to 1973, and the concept of
energy security was invented.

At that time, cybersecurity was not the concept
which was important, just the security of

supply.

Now, to the description of the energy, cybersecurity
should be the new thing to be added, and not

only to be added but also to be worked out,
and to ensure that our consumers are cyber

secure.

Very good.

So, as a businessman, each challenge turns
into an opportunity.

Who is next?

We believe that the future is electric, but
we also think that it is digital, and the

digital solutions are the key for the power
system going forward.

I would like to tell a little story about
how the system works today, and I think this

is a positive story for the future going forward.

It is about Denmark, Norway, and the clap
ratings between the TSOs in each countries.

The Danish system has really been transformed
since 2005.

I think it is about 40 per cent renewables
now.

It was a thermal system like 15 years ago.

Some days, it is all renewable production
in Denmark, and mostly wind.

Those days, we of course import wind power
from Denmark, and we're happy to be able to

store the water in our hydro-reservoirs these
days.

This is of course fixed by good market solutions,
and a good collaboration between the TSOs.

And, in the opposite way, when it is not blowing
in Denmark, we can produce hydropower from

the Norwegian mountains, and we can export
it to Denmark.

Then temporary basis the days where it is
heavy winds, and Denmark are exporting a lot

of power to Norway, and the machines are kind
of in the standby position, and then suddenly,

it's too heavy winds, so the windmills shut
down.

Then you really see how the systems are collaborating
in a perfect way together.

Just in in, I don't know, some 30 minutes
or so, you have the change from 1,700 megawatts

of input to Norway, to 1,700 of exports from
Norway.

That it is 3,400 change in the Norwegian system,
and also the ramping of the interconnectors.

At these times, yes, you can have good automatic
systems but you need to take up the phone,

and call for production in the mountains.

This, we have seen more instances where this
is happening, and it works perfectly well.

We have good reserve markets, but we also
have very good system operators that make

this happen.

I think, when we are building the, getting
the new Norlink cable from Norway to Germany

in operation, and also the new interconnector
to the UK, this will be the situation.

So, yes, we can have a good digital systems,
but we need to collaborate, and we need to

have a good relationship with our neighbours
in order to get the best out of the systems.

Thanks a lot.

This is a very important message, for all
of you who do not know, Statnett has produced

an app called Balance, and you can operate
the grid on this app.

If you get to level 17, you can apply for
a job at Statnett!

Robert, are you the next one?

That's a good idea, by the way!

Sorry, this app has been in the top ten for
many, many months worldwide.

It has been downloaded millions of times.

So it's really cool.

Cool, yes.

For my side to add of course, we believe the
future is electric, the future is digital,

that also that the digital technologies that
enable the energy transition of the same digital

technologies that help with energy efficiency,
if we look at it from the grid perspective,

of course, then help with sustainability,
so I think also that all of those aspects

should be taken into account, and also the
enabling of course what we discussed here

today of the active role of the citizens in
the energy world, and all of this becomes

at the end of the same question, let's say,
look, in moving towards the new energy system,

which is unstoppable in my belief, through
digital technologies, it's a big challenge,

I agree with what we said today, but I think
it is also a huge opportunity of really pushing

forward all of those goals that we mentioned.

I'm going to use your "collaborative" word.

I think it is up to us here - policymakers,
government leaders, innovators, solutions

providers, utilities, NGOs, industry players
- all of us are responsible to make sure that

we create the conditions in the energy transition
to make sure the consumers are able to engage

and participate, take ownership of, and really
benefit from the transition, and then we will

be successful.

Boris, a final word Foreign Minister
Today, once again, very nice.

The whole energy transition means a lot of
changes, changes for the industry, changes

for the society.

Digitalisation is part of the energy transaction
means of course that I like the opportunities,

and let's go for the opportunities jointly,
and then we can make it a success.

I can promise you next year, we come up then
with 56, 57 pearls of whatever.

Thank you very much.

Very good.

We've been talking about the need for optimising
the system, and maybe, as a recommendation

for the organiser, next year, if there is
a panel on great infrastructure, we may want

to have some gas-grid operator, because we
need to keep the price of this transformation

as low as possible but we also need to be
very, very fast in implementing the necessary

step.

Maybe looking at gas infrastructure is also
an idea.

I thank all these fantastic panellists.

Thank you very much.

For your time, and your insight.

And, of course, thanks a lot to you for being
with us.

I have a message...


