Thank you very much.

It is a great pleasure to be here, and to
talk about not only an important subject - I

have to admit, it is my favourite subject
- to talk on the four dimensions of effective

carbon pricing.

Before I talk about the four dimensions of
carbon pricing, I would like to emphasise

an important fact, and this important fact
is that almost all energy experts have underestimated

the technological progress in the error of
renewable energies, and, MPV, so the machine

is not doing what I want that they should
do.

What you can see here is basically, if you
compare the energy scenarios and the whole

historical data about deployment of renewables,
you can easily see that almost all experts

have underestimated the potential of PV, and
it turns out that 30 to 50 per cent of global

electricity generation could come from PV
by 2050. -- this is an enormous success we

are we've experienced in the last decade.

However, and this is quite important, despite
technological process, and despite all the

international talks about climate change,
we already have - we are in a situation where

the global emissions are rising, rising, and,
in particular, in the last few years, we've

seen they are rising again after they've paused
a little bit.

The fundamental question is what it the reason
for that?

Why are emissions rising?

This brings me to carbon pricing.

I will not talk today about carbon pricing
in the usual attitude of an economist telling

you that carbon pricing is the most efficient
thing.

I'm not so much interested in efficiency.

I'm really interested in effectiveness.

When I am talking about effectiveness, I mean
"What kind of policy instruments are needed

that we can really reduce emissions which
are consistent with the goals we have agreed

in Paris in 2015?"

If you look at this slide, this is from my
point of view really boring.

You can see that it is basically the committed
emissions.

The committed emissions caused by coal, by
the existing coal-fired plants, and by the

planned ones.

It is easy to digest in this figure that coal
alone will exhaust more than half of the available

carbon budget.

It is true that the he did pulling of coal
capacity has been a little bit reduced but

nevertheless, we're still in a phase where
countries he did pound their coal capacities,

and, if we calculate the emissions, the coal
issue decides if we will close the door to

the 1.5 target in the next decade or if we
can keep open the door for ambitious climate

policy goals.

So you might ask the question: can we expect
that this Renaissance of coal can continue?

My answer is yes, it can, because, at the
global scale, we see almost oversupply of

the fossil fuels compared to the limiting
disposal space of the atmosphere.

Therefore, there are basically live two reasons
for carbon pricing.

The first one is, even if we can expect dramatic
technological breakthroughs in the renewable

energy sector, we need carbon pricing because
of this oversupply of the fossil fuels, because

carbon pricing on the one hand incentivises
new carbon-free technologies.

It penalises the use of fossil fuels according
to the carbon content, and, what is quite

important, is that basically the carbon price
can create revenues which can be used by the

finance ministers.

Here, I will talk about the four dimensions
of carbon pricing which is, on the one hand,

the regional coverage, the sectoral coverage,
the level of carbon pricing, and, in the end,

the political feasibility.

Let me talk here about the international and
regional co-operation.

What we have seen so far over the last few
years is an expansion of carbon-pricing schemes

in particular within the G20 countries and
this is important because, it is obvious that,

when just one country might implement a carbon
price - if the carbon price is sufficiently

high - then, basically, this country might
lose competitiveness, and, therefore, we need

a landscape of emerging and co-ordinated carbon
pricing over time.

This is something we can observe at a global
scale, and, also, we see, basically, a very,

very interesting examples where this bilateral
and multilateral carbon-pricing schemes emerge

in Norway, Switzerland, California, and Quebec,
and so on.

This is a whole list of countries implementing
this kind of carbon pricing, and this is a

starting point for international co-operation
and co-ordination.

The second aspect is sectoral coverage.

Sectoral coverage is very important because,
in Germany, we talk about sector coupling,

when the transport sector and the electricity
sector and the heating sector, and carbon

pricing is therefore quite important to give
the whole economy a reasonable carbon-price

signal, because we are basically aiming for
such a fundamental transformation of our economies

that, without carbon pricing, it is hard to
conceive that we can achieve such an ambitious

goal.

Unfortunately, most of a carbon-pricing schemes
have only limited sectoral coverage.

The last aspect is - or the third aspect - not
my last one - is the level of carbon pricing.

This is a quite important thing.

I had the privilege to be part of the report
of the high-level commission on carbon pricing

mandated by the World Bank together with my
friend Nick Stern and Diglets, and we calculate

a carbon price consistent with the goals of
the Paris Agreement - roughly with the Paris

Agreement - and here we calculated that, by
2020, we would need a carbon price 40 to 50

dollars per Tonne of CO2 and finding a shorter
entry point for this long-term transformation

which is required when we want to achieve
the Paris Agreement, which basically means

the stabilisation of the global mean temperature
well below two degrees.

Unfortunately, most of our carbon pricing
schemes, in particular, the emissions scheme,

lacked dynamic efficiency.

We have a shopper decline of carbon prices
in the European emissions trading scheme we've

seen in the recent months, a little bit of
an increase, so it will come back down.

I believe the current form of the emissions
scheme is not sufficient at all to be consistent

with our long-term goals, and therefore we
advocated a minimum price, introducing a minimum

price in the European emissions trading scheme.

The last important point which determines,
it should determine the carbon price, are

the capital costs, and the interest rate.

The capital costs are very important for renewables.

Because, the share of capital costs for renewables
is much higher compared to the fossil fuel

sector, and, if you can see, increasing capital
costs, this basically has a negative, a strong

negative impact on the deployment of renewables
in order to counteract the increase of interest

rate and capital costs.

You need basically an increasing carbon price.

Carbon pricing is, so to say, a hedging strategy
in increasing interest rates and capital costs.

These are the four dimensions which should
be taken into account when we want to have

effective carbon pricing, and, again, when
I'm talking about effective carbon pricing,

I also talk about the political visibility.

You can see here basically is that the carbon
pricing schemes, the tech schemes, empirically

is much higher potential for carbon revenues
compared to the emissions trading schemes.

One thing which is very, very important for
the political feasibility of carbon pricing

is the following: All empirical studies clearly
indicate that carbon pricing can only be implemented

if policymakers are transparent what should
and what will happen with the revenues.

It can be for green investment, it can be
for tax, labour taxes or capital taxes, but

policymakers should be transparent.

Transparency is key for the political feasibility.

In all the successful examples, in which carbon
pricing was successful, this transparency

issue played quite an important and an outstanding
role.

So this is what I have to say about just an
effective pricing, and, again, I haven't talked

about efficiency.

Efficiency means a little bit less costs,
a little bit more gains.

I'm talking here about effectiveness which
brings us to a situation which helps us to

reduce emissions, and, secondly, a fairness
issue where we can again basically take into

account physical visibility and distribution
concerns.

Thank you very much.


