Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, a very
good morning to all of you.

It's so great that the new German Government
continues with the tradition of pushing the

Energiewende and bringing so many stakeholders
across the world to discuss global energy

issues.

Today, I would like to talk to you one single
topic which is known to be the invisible energy

- energy efficiency.

I will tell you a few things about our report
which we published today.

But before going to that, let me put this
global energy picture in context.

First of all, energy, ladies and gentlemen,
is a good thing.

Energy makes our economies grow, makes our
lives of more comfortable and more - so therefore,

we have no problems with energy.

Our problem is with emissions.

So, therefore, when we look at the energy
picture today, we see on the one hand, it

brings a lot of economic growth, interconnectivity,
and also terrific across the - electrification

across the world, but two thirds of the emissions
causing climate change.

Another important part, another important
responsibility of the energy, is, in addition

to climate change, energy is responsible for
air pollution in many countries, especially

emerging countries.

This is a reason for several millions of deaths
in developing countries, especially as a result

of air pollution.

We also know that, today, billions of people
have no access to electricity in different

parts of the world, especially in Africa and
parts of Asia.

As such, the United Nations has taken sustainable
development goals as a major topic this year.

I will be this afternoon flying to New York
to speak at the United Nations General Assembly

to talk about the electricity access which
is a key issue and the role of energy there.

Looking at the energy picture today, we see
a couple of important trends.

First of all, global energy demands last year
increased two times higher than it did in

the previous year.

Two times higher.

It was driven by very good global economic
growth.

We also see that, last year, two fields flourished:
renewable energies, solar and wind, but at

the same time, natural gas.

Natural gas, ladies and gentlemen, last year,
had the golden year in the last ten years.

Mainly as a result of growing use in Asia.

And we also see that the coal use after two
years of a decline, coal started to increase

in 2017, mainly as a actual for the power
sector.

Mainly in Asia, and a big chunk of the new
coal growth comes from the sub critical plants

in Asia, power plants which will be there
several days to come in looking at our infrastructure.

A very critical technology, carbon-capture
and storage, has not picked up last year.

Looking at this very picture, ladies and gentlemen,
and the order of magnitude of the challenge,

we, and the IEA believe, have no luxury to
focus only on one technology and forget others.

We need all the fields, all the technologies,
with that could - technologies, that could

help us reach our climate goals.

In terms of carbon dioxide emissions which
is the main sin of our energy world today,

years and years, global CO2 emissions increased,
except for 2009 when we had the financial

crisis.

But as I reported to your colleagues last
year here, we had a very good news that the

2014/15/16 global emissions were flat and
did not increase for the first time, even

though the global economic increase, global
emissions were flat.

What a good news.

What encouraging news for all of us.

Economic growth but emissions flat.

This was the good news I shared with you this
year.

I said let's see what happens in 2017.

What we know is that the news of last year,
unfortunately, is really disappointing.

After three flats, carbon use emissions 2017,
we have seen again an increase in global CO2

emissions which is definitely disappointing,
and which is definitely far from what we would

like to see.

Why is it happening?

Many reasons, but one of them I wanted to
highlight with you.

It is the energy efficiency.

Energy efficiency improvements last year,
ladies and gentlemen, was much lower than

what we have seen historically.

We talk more on energy efficiency, but energy
efficiency improvements are becoming weaker.

Last year, very low energy efficiency improvements,
mainly as a result of lower energy prices

and the governments being much more relaxed
than they have been.

This is definitely a shame for all of us.

Energy efficiency is a cornerstone of fighting
against climate change, air pollution, energy

security, and economic growth.

And the last years, energy efficiency improvement
is only half of it what we need to have if

we have a clean energy transition as it is
shown in our report.

So therefore 2017 was definitely a bad year
for energy efficiency as it was a bad year

for the global CO2 emissions.

What is very worrying, ladies and gentlemen,
is that, as we found out in our report, when

you look at the global energy consumption,
what we consume today in the buildings, cars,

industries, homes, 68 per cent - 68 per cent
- of the global energy consumption is not

subject to any efficiency standards - no efficiency
standards today.

Today, for example, two out of three buildings
constructed, as we speak now in the world

- two out of three buildings - they have no
building codes, and they're being constructed

now, and those buildings will be with us for
several decades to come.

So, therefore, the 68 per cent no energy efficiency
standards and costs is an area that international

energy is focusing to mobilise the governments
to put the standards there.

When we look at the economics of energy efficiency,
it is an expensive story.

It depends how you look at it.

In order to reach our climate targets, we
have to make trillions of dollars of energy

efficiency investments.

More efficient cars, more efficient buildings,
more efficient engines in the industry, efficient

buildings, and so on.

They require money - additional money compared
to conventional facilities.

But - but - here is the point: if you put
one US dollar additional money to make these

facilities energy consumption more efficient,
you get back three dollars throughout the

lifetime of this car, of this building, of
this lightbulb, or whatever it is.

So you put one and get back three.

In terms of saving of the oil bill, coal,
gas, electricity, whatever bill you pay.

Why does it not work?

Because we know the entire world of markets.

If markets smell money - why put in one getting
three doesn't work?

For the following reason: you put one today,
and three you get in several years, five years,

six years back, the payback is six to seven
years.

This is the very role for the governments.

The governments should play a role here to
have a breach between putting one in today,

and getting the three dollars in a few years'
time to build that bridge.

This is extremely important to build the economic
case for is the consumers for the users of

energy.

In some energy-efficiency measures, it makes
perfect economic sense, it is the issue of

timing of payback periods, and the role for
the governments to make this bridge between

the short-term investments and the longer
term payback periods.

Now, in terms of our climate targets, when
you look at the NDCs that the governments

agree in Paris, this is the very - if we want
to go and reach our climate targets, efficiency

policies can be very, very important.

Only efficiency policies alone can stabilise
our CO2 emissions.

Only efficiency.

Forget all other things.

This efficiency policy, ladies and gentlemen,
they do not need to discover new technologies.

They just need to put the right policies by
the governments.

This is the old story we are facing today.

No new technological discoveries.

They're all proven technologies, policies,
and we have to do there, of course, if we

want to go further down to reach our climate
goals, we need other technologies such as

renewables, in some countries, nuclear, in
some countries - every country should have

its own policies depending on their realities
and resources.

Many countries have renewable sources, many
countries have gas resources, hydro resources,

but every country - but every country - has
energy efficiency resources.

So no country, no minister can say, "I don't
have resources."

Every country has energy-efficiency potential
sources.

Now, to finish, ladies and gentlemen, we believe
the clean energy transition needs to rely

on energy efficiency renewables and other
clean energy technologies.

This is critical for all of us.

And, energy-efficiency policies reduce the
CO2 emissions, on the other hand, reduce the

air pollution, but brings economic benefits
and very important for energy security.

An expression I want to underline here, energy
security, especially in those days when the

world goes through difficult times, different
tensions, across the world, and it's very

important to save energy and to use energy
much more efficiently.

Now, we also think, in addition to energy
efficiency, other technologies can play a

critical role here.

It can be renewables, it can be advanced technologies
such as the in some countries, carbon capture

and storage in other countries, in some other
countries, electric cars, and others.

When it comes to energy efficiency once again,
the agency is keen to put the energy efficiency

as the very first fuel for the renewables,
oil, gas, others.

The others follow that, and what we are doing
at IEA is we are sharing the best practices

amongst the countries how to make the legislations
for energy efficiency, how to monitor them,

how to get the results because it is an area
that we all learn from each other.

It is Minister Altmaier, in his inspiring
speech, mentioned that IEA is ready to be

the global hundred for energy efficiency,
and we are working with countries across the

world to make the energy efficiency first
to bring them success stories in terms of

environment, economics, and energy security.

Thank you very much for your attention.

Thank you.


