Thank you. Thank you very much. I have to
tell you how honoured I am that I can address

you this morning in this huge hall, and I
really would like to thank our honourable

hosts, German ministers Maas and Altmaier,
for bringing positive energy into this room.

I'm very glad to see my very good colleagues
Fatih Birol, Director-General Mr Adnan, lots

of colleagues and ministers from all over
the world, lots of CEOs and directors, activists,

and very inspirational entrepreneurs from
Africa. So, distinguished guests, I really

think that we had an excellent start, and
I think that, if you're talking about energy

transition dialogue, it's enough to look around
the room how important this topic has become,

and what kind of tremendous interest it creates
among the policymakers, scientists, civil

society activists, and, of course, energy
experts from all over world. I would like

to thank to Lucia, and I felt I could listen
to her personal experience, because I think,

if we as Europeans have one very important
task, this is to share our knowledge, to share

our experience, and to make sure that we will
help those millions of people living in Africa

to get basic access to electricity. I think
that we can do it through the efforts of such

an entrepreneurs like Lucia who is not only
a role model I'm sure for her daughter but

for a lot of women in Africa, a lot of entrepreneurs
there. We are working hard with our European

institutions, investment bank and member states,
to make sure we put in place an external investment

fund which I hope will bring more than 40
billion euros to Africa to support exactly

the projects like we described - decentralised
power grids, local production, prosumers,

development which doesn't require huge power
plants and hundreds of kilometres of cables

being put across Africa because you can develop
energy locally. That should be our task, and,

in this, we had very strong European African
partnership. If you allow me to develop on

the topics which both ministers Maas and Altmaier
presented so eloquently, I think that it's

only fair that this kind of large-scale dialogue
is happening here in Berlin, of all places,

because, as we've heard, and I totally subscribe
to the statement, Energiewende is no longer

a German concept. It used to be back in the
days when energy transition was still a marginal

issue in most countries, but back then, the
germ was promoting and boosting - Germany

was boosting renewable energy as such a lonely
pioneer. By now, this German concept has been

successfully exported across Europe, and I
would say, around the world. Actually, the

German word "Energiewende" has entered into
the vocabulary of many languages, and, as

we've seen this morning, there is no need
for a translation. In fact, in the last year,

the Financial Times published an article,
which went viral, and the title was "Big Green

Bank". It attempted to explain how renewable
energy became an unstoppable resource and

industry all over world. A special section
was dedicated to the role of Germany in triggering

this process and then it argued that the last
decade, the green energy industry was still

expensive, sluggish, and German. As we all
know, the prices of renewable energy since

then are dropping very fast, and the clean
energy is becoming global and a universal

reality. We can say that the green energy
of today is competitive, dynamic, and truly

European, and, on top of it, I would say very
sustainable job creator which managed to create

jobs even during the harsh economic crisis
we went through, and, today, we can say we

have nine million people working in a green/green
tech industry. Of course, this has a major

impact on public opinion. This has a major
impact on decision-making. I think that, if

you would look how to best translate the Energiewende
into the Brusselsish, the language the EU-speak,

we use, in Brussels, I would translate it
as the "energy unit". Why? Let me explain.

As we know, Europe is at a major threshold,
with geopolitical instabilities affecting

our energy supply. We are still faced with
underinvestment into the energy infrastructure

and into the climate technology investment
if you want to meet our Paris goals, and we

went through very difficult economic and financial
crisis which has really highlighted how urgently

we need to undertake very clear steps to address
the climate change. So this combination of

different factors has manifested in a clear
and urgent need to act collectively at the

European level. And there was a need to do
things differently as well, not to repeat

the past. The novelty is that, for the first
time, the European Commission is treating

energy not as a standalone policy field, but
as an umbrella for most of others. The project

brings together 14 Commissioners, and their
respective services in a project that I have

the honour to lead. I can tell you that a
lot of coffees with my colleagues! But the

fact is we are able to work on this cross-sectoral
portfolio decision-making process brought

a lot of changes and brought a lot of positive
experiences. We need it, because the size

and scale of this project implies a prominent
place among the Commission's priorities. We

are not only ensuring we have a stable and
sustainable supply of energy. We are also

looking into the ways how to modernise and
energise the entire economy in the smartest,

most sustainable future-proof way. This requires
not only energy policies but concerns our

trade agreement. It affects our digital infrastructure.
It reinforces our climate diplomacy, and it

boosts the rights of our consumers, and it
brings new demands for the transportation

technologies for the agriculture practices
for creation of investment platforms, research

funds, and I can go on and on and on. But
I think already this example of the priorities

we have to cover to show how our efforts are
in getting things right if it comes to energy

transition, we have to jointly undertake.
We kicked off the energy union ambitious when

we started in January 2015. We have seen from
the beginning that energy union is actually

the engine of the fourth industrial revolution.
It might be this time an electric engine rather

than a steam or fuel engine, and we will rely
more on - 

but we know that we have these three sectors
in the proper constellation, it always needs

to the next industrial revolution. We are
in the midst of the fourth industrial revolution,

and, of course, we want to make sure that,
just like the previous three revolutions,

this one can, and should be, led by Europe.
We learned that fragmented national solutions

will not achieve sufficient scale. And, EU-level
efforts supporting the aggregation is clearly

essential for Europe to win the industrial
leadership race. In practice, this means supporting

Europe's R & D in order to continue and accelerate
the trend of new recoveries, existing start-ups

and across the valley of death, and reach
the marketable scale, and, for this, we have

also to provide other financial tools like
connecting your facilities like yunka fa [phonetic].

I'm a strong promoter of what I call innovation
dividend. What I hear from our start-up colleagues

is we're not looking that much for a grant,
we look for first contract. We look for equity

investment. We look for somebody to be partner
with, so we can demonstrate that we can develop

our idea in a product which could be placed
on the market, and I really want to create

the better system where our great ideas from
the European labs will not be marketed or

sold, I want our scientists to strive here
in Europe, and I think it is our common task

if you want to be successful in the modernising
of our economy. It also means that we have

to work of more together in the support of
macro-cross-border infrastructure projects,

but that we also involved in these discussions
local and city levels where often the most

ambitious projects are presented. One of my
nicest surprises in my job in being the Energy

Union Vice-President was an active role our
mayors in Europe across the world are playing

in energy transition. Why? Because they are
the first to address to when people are complaining

where the air is unbreathable, where the traffic
is congested, where they don't have the services

of the citizens they insist they have the
right for. Therefore, co-operation in the

European and global covenant of mayors means
that they want to be 100 per cent sure they

will have proper access in the knowledge of
European funds, and they would use the programmes

designed to help their cities. And they are
big supporters of the projects of the infrastructure.

They are the first to support smart grids,
energy storage, local renewables, production,

smart transportation, and many other projects,
and I'm really proud of all the European mayors

applying in the current covenant of mayors,
because they represent the lion's share of

the participation where more than 6,000 mayors
from Europe is playing a very important role.

From the local level, we should continue to
the individual level, and invest in life-long

learning and vocational training. Millions
of new jobs are being created in the new economy

but you must constantly think about those
whose jobs who no longer exist, and equip

them with the new tools for the future. As
you know, this is a challenging task, because

top ten jobs today on the labour market where
every company is looking for the expert, top-ten

jobs of today, they didn't exist just five
years ago. That is how dynamically the global

labour market is evolving and challenging,
and this is how we have to adjust what we

teach our youngsters at the universities,
and how we adjust or long-life learning programme

for the future. Finally, we need to make sure
that an appropriate European regulatory framework

is in place to match our common goals and
objectives. This is what we have been doing

over the past four years, and this is how
we have translated the Energy Union into the

concrete legislative proposals and executed
measures which are turning our vision into

new reality. We aim to have better integrating
our industrial competitiveness objective at

the EU policies. This includes investment
plans for Europe, the capital markets Universal

Credit which should bring more investment
into the projects, linked with energy union.

We put the strategy of single-market and completing
the work on making sure that finally would

have internal energy market in Europe on the
high level, we are working very actively on

trade, on the economy, and on the digital
single market. Our legislative work is being

concluded. Our proposals are now in the hands
of the co-legislator - I call it "final stretch"

- because it is the European parliament and
the member states who will put the final touches,

and I believe will adopt the proposals at
the latest by the end of this year, because

we have already agreed some major proposals
which are already changing the energy and

climate landscape of Europe. We adopted now
ETS framework for 2030, and we see how the

carbon price started to climb after that decision.
We adopted all series of measures under the

security of supply regulation for gas. The
decision of transparency of intergovernmental

agreements, and we are finalising our work
on extending pieces of legislation on energy

union governance, renewables directives, and
electricity, market and design. In a few weeks,

we will close the loop for transportation
as well. We already adopted two packages for

the modern mobility, and, in a few weeks,
we are going to conclude on this file as well

by presenting new proposals for emission standards
for heavy-duty vehicles. Let me reassure you

that this process is not being done behind
the closed doors. The political decisions

which are being made right now are too important
for being done in some kind of exclusive closed

manner. We are therefore eager to make our
processes as transparent as possible, and

inclusive as it could be, because I'm first
to tell you that I know that it cannot build

energy union in Brussels, we need to build
it here in Berlin, Slovakia, and Poland all

across the EU member states. I would say also
in our neighbouring countries 

we are ready, as I said at the beginning,
to support our positive experience and technology

and to share it with our partners in in our
third country partners. Talk about energy

is a topic to be discussed with the experts,
but it is our common duty to explain personally

and explain why energy is important, and why
the climate change is presenting for the whole

mankind. I'm therefore trying to travel extensively
across Europe to make sure that energy union

tours will bring this idea to the wider public.
If you allow me to conclude with one of the

ideas that I had the honour and I appreciate
the chance to discuss it so early on with

Minister Altmaier in his mandate. For us to
succeed, and I believe set a good example

for the world, is clearly to demonstrate that
we have not only global framework in the form

of Paris Agreement, that we would have this
new forward-looking, and I believe the, the

most modern energy and climate legislation
in place. We need to have our member states

on board. And, therefore, I'm pleading for
you to work together with our member states,

so each one of them will develop their national
energy and climate plans. That they would

do this homework, this strategising, brainstorming,
within the member states. How do I picture

my country in 2030? What kind of energy mix
do I foresee for my country? How are we going

to build the path to the carbon-neutral future
of the second part of the century? Because

this is what we signed up to Paris. We are
working with our member states to have this

national energy and climate plans before the
end of this year, and I believe that this

would be the strong underpinning we need for
the new global and European framework where

the member states would show they buy in,
where they send in a strong signal to investors,

and where they see that this energy transition
is taking place here in Europe concretely

on the ground. So, ladies and gentlemen, thank
you very much for giving me the opportunity

to debrief you on what we do together with
our member states in Europe, and I'm very

much looking forward to the debate and discussions
and lots of meetings that we have prepared

for ourselves. Thanks again to Germany, our
gracious host. Thanks very much.


