So let me start by introducing very briefly
the erudite and wise panel of investors here

on the podium.

Right next to Kingsmill is Zoë Knight who
leads the Centre for Sustainable Finance at

HSBC.

That's a think-tank within the bank which
is established to lead and shape the debate

on mobilising capital flows to invest the
world's major sustainability challenges, and

so, before, she was Senior Director of Equity
Research at a number of city banks.

Paddy Padmanathan has been the CEO of ACWA
Power International since 2006, steering it

to become one of the leading private developers,
owners, and operators of renewable power generation

across 11 countries in the Middle East, Africa,
and South-East Asia.

You began your career at the other side.

On my left is Sverker Åkerblom.

He is director BlackRock's global renewable
power platform.

BlackRock as you know, is the world's largest
independent asset manager with more than six

trillion assets under management.

Next to him is Diego Pignatelli who is a partner
at Greentech Capital Advisors covering the

European market.

Diego recently joined Greentech after a 32-year
career at UBS Investment Bank where he was

the Group Managing Director and the Chairman
of the MIA Investment Banking.

Greentech is the first global investment bank
that is focused on energy transition.

Finally, on the far left, my dear friend Jochen
Wermuth, Chief Investment Officer of Wermuth

Asset Management, an advisory firm that is
committed to sustainable investments.

He also serves as an investment committee
member of the German Government's 24 billion

Energy Transition Fund which has a much more
complicated German name that he gave me yesterday

which I cannot repeat!

So, Sverker, from the perspective of one of
the largest asset managers in the world, the

narrative that Kingsmill laid out must give
you the heebie-jeebies?

Yes, it is an interesting narrative, and I
can give a little bit of a BlackRock perspective

on it, both from the big BlackRock but also
the small BlackRock from where I submit.

From the big BlackRock, we manage 6 trillion,
so two per cent of our listed equity.

Where we see flows going is a good indication
of what is going on in the markets globally.

If you look on the flows, pension funds, insurance
companies, there's not one single meeting

we go into today where particularly environmental,
social, and governance isn't first and foremost

on the agenda.

What does this mean?

Well, people are trying to define what this
means at the moment, but normally the route

they take initially is by looking at exclusions.

So, they exclude certain sectors in what they
invest into, for example, fossil fuels.

The second big trend we see among investors
at the moment is rather than excluding what

they invest into, it is include what they
invest into.

So, what we kind of define as "impact investments"
investing into what we do, renewables, to

make a positive impact, and this is not - to
put is in perspective, this is not all by

doing good and doing well.

What people have cleared identified is there
is a clear risk, for example, in investing

into fossil fuels, and a clear opportunity
into investing into renewable power.

Obviously your portfolio is focused on the
European markets, and sometimes, there is

a tendency to in OECD countries, but Paddy,
your perspective is rather different.

You're leading the charge in emerging markets,
and you have quite an interesting perspective

from there?

The rate at which renewables are being deployed
in the emerging or developing markets, if

you like, is something completely different,
because, to start with, we don't have the

legacy issues.

We don't have - we're in an environment where
either there is not enough access yet, a lot

of people still denied access.

So, there is a need for additional capacity.

Even the amount of capacity that we have tends
to be fairly old and needs to be replaced,

so, we don't have the issue of displacement.

Given the renewable energy has come down to
below five cents across the world, the emerging

markets world at least, because that's also
where quite a lot of the resources are, right?

Last week, Senegal, 4.5 cents, per kilowatt
hour.

This is nothing to do with rich or poor countries.

Right across the world, solar, PV, and wind
five cents below, and more interestingly know,

concentrated solar power, dispatchable energy
day and night, at levels of, regardless of

where it is now in our belief.

You're able to potentially move towards 100
per cent renewable energy systems at blended

costs, around about five, or below five cents
per kilowatt hour.

These are places where, with actual imports,
cost of energy has been running at - true

cost of energy has been running at anything
to 14 cents to 20 cents per kilowatt hour.

All of a sudden, in a matter of a couple of
years, it is come down to this level, and

also here, here is also the place where yes,
we don't have a hell of a lot of grid connections,

but, again, photovoltaic is perfect for distributed
generation.

You're seeing this in the poorest parts of
Africa and parts of the Middle East.

The issue here is not money.

It is not lack of money.

There is plenty of money that is available.

The issue is lack of institutional capacity
to put the policies to create their enable

be experiment.

To procure the projects to roll them out as
fast as industry private sector is able to

deliver it.

Everybody has accepted they're not able to
get the policies and procurement practices

sorted out and deliver a stable platform for
us to step in.

So that is really quite a significant insight.

If the challenge is less about providing the
capital for the good, for the new, then the

challenge may be in dealing with the capital
invested in the old.

HSBC has been around for more than 100 years,
if I'm not mistaken, and therefore, on the

balance sheet of your bank, sits some of that
old.

How do you look at this transition?

We've been around 150 years and celebrated
our anniversary recently.

We've been fundamental at financing the industrial
revolution and many other revolutions that

have taken place in that time.

Now we are having to think really hard about
what low-carbon transition looks like and

what the road map will be for us to transition
the economy into a configuration that works

for a two-degree world, and more importantly,
a 1.5-degree one.

Kingsmill and I talk about the stranded assets
narrative.

We talk on stranded assets versus practicalities
of industries and sectors.

So we know that the easy move is to decarbonise
the power system, but we also know that, to

transition away from transport depending on
oil, we will need to electrify significantly

and do that in a low-carbon way.

Now, that's really difficult, because, in
transport, for instance, and other industries,

in many cases, we don't know what "good" looks
like.

So, for cement in steel, the questions like,
"What is best practice for a zero-carbon steel

facility?"

How is that going to work?

On a local framework, we're looking at how
demand might change locally.

And what the tools investors can use to look
at to assess what best practice looks like

in that high-carbon to low-carbon move in
sectors that anti-easily as decarbonised.

Thank you.

That is an incredibly important point that
we will need to come back to in the discussion.

Understandably, the excitement and quite a
bit of the discussion focuses on the decarbonisation

of the electricity system.

Worldwide, it is only part, it is a modest
part of the total energy system.

So, what does that mean for electrification,
and what does it mean for those hard-to-abate

sectors?

Diego, investment bankers shift capital from
one place to another, from owners to projects.

What is the perspective from your business?

Thank you.

Greentech is a global investment bank which
has really focused on connecting incumbents

with innovative disruptors.

Over the last nine years, we've done over
100 transactions in this field, and we are

deeply in touch with clients across the board
trying to adjust their business model.

We certainly see a flywheel effect happening.

The cost reduction is driving the benefits
of integration of convergent technologies.

It is happening really in two main sectors.

Electricity of course, again, the cheaper
technologies are enabling systems to be integrated

in more holistic companies which enable us
to decarbonise, decentralise and digitise

further.

It is this reduction in cost connected with
the battery storage and cloud-based and cheaper

sensors which will really change the electricity
systems.

What we are seeing is that incumbents are
trying to add to their business model, not

only technology but also the people connector
with that technology.

The most important thing is the importance
of customers in the whole distribution process.

You never thought you needed to be a customer
with utility, but today you need to be a customer

by energy company, so there is a big shift
in mentality that is taking place.

Connected to this is personal transportation.

The disruption coming to the personal transportation
market with the approval of level four automation

is having going to have a significant impact.

First of all, because the cost, the unit cost,
of transport is going to decrease probably

by two thirds or three-quarters, according
to estimates, and the second point is that

the number of number of new cars being sold
could be halved in the next 20 years as people

decide to have only one car and then call
in a driverless vehicle.

Connected to this, there's the other very
important issue of the batteries.

I mean, a six kilowatt battery in a car will
be able to power a number of California houses

for 24 hours, and once these power systems
are connected, and there has been already

a number of studies in this area done in Holland,
more recently but in Denmark a few years ago,

really it will be the X Factor behind this.

So, going back to what Kingsmill said earlier,
I mean, we do, betting against technological

change and innovation has never really been
- I will leave it to the investors on my left

and right - has never been a winning strategy.

The problem is that the incumbents struggle
to see it, or, if they don't struggle, they

struggle to adapt or come out to the market.

They say actually, my pipeline is going to
be worthless in 20 years.

It is quite the tough argument, it is quite
a tough statement for models change, and dominant

industries disappear.

Someone asks how do you go bankrupt, the answer
is gradually, and then suddenly as the tide

changes.

Kingsmill might argue that suddenly is around
the corner.

If you are an asset manager, massive opportunity,
a fantastic time to be alive, couldn't be.

If you want to make money, it is heaven.

The problem is we may not be around if we
don't change capital flows dramatically in

the next three years.

It is really, really urgent as we were taught
yesterday at Project Drawdown.

The beat is, for example - the beauty, in
Germany, we consume a quarter of the energy

of GDP and one eighth of the footprint of
GDP than most emerging markets.

If we could only invest in EU and German companies
to do business in emerging markets, we could

export that resource efficiency.

The nexus between the energy transition, the
transport transition, the agrarian transition,

the circle economy business model, the IT,
the artificial intelligence, all of that gives

you fantastic business opportunities.

So what I see as the biggest challenge is
to move the capital, we hear that we're still

short, one trillion or so a year in investments
to get the transition done.

Here, we don't - cash is not an issue, so
I would like to get to know you better.

We still feel we have a big shortage of capital.

There is exactly, angel investment, lots of
buy-out capital, well established, German

wind park giving you a three per cent return.

There is a shortage of capital to the en[Nuclear
that will put together a bankable project.

It works with partners in emerging markets
to get the project up for the more boring

investors.

As a long-short investors, what a wonderful
time to short the evil people destroying the

planet.

It is wonderful, thank you.

Wow.

."Evil people who are destroying the planet"!

But there is something there, right?

There is an enormous base of investment of
stock in if we should believe Kingsmill's

story, those assets will be a complicated
process.

Whether it is in your country or in Saudi
Arabia, or the investment portfolio within

BlackRock, what mechanisms do we envision
to make that transition for the existing fossil

fuel assets towards their impending write-offs?

What process do we envision for that?

I see people going ahead, somebody start,
we will go to the flow.

Zoë?

It is such a complicated question which we've
been pondering for years.

The thing I'm keen about at the moment, and
it is quite boring, is disclosure.

It is disclosure from both fossil fuel companies
but also others in the real economy.

For instance, how we manage our balance sheet
transition and how we manage our business

to facilitate our customers, and help them
on their journey to low carbon means we need

more information about how good they're at
it.

This is coming back to this hard-to-abate
sectors thing.

We know that fossil fuels will be with us
for a while as we move, and we want to make

a transition journey a smooth one, but inevitably,
the role of the market is to, for different

participants to have different expectations
of where growth will come from, and how quickly

it will move.

In order to create those expectations, we
need more information on what good looks like

on a path way to low pressure transmission.

- low-carbon transmission.

That what good looks like in oil, gas, steel,
and coal, is only something that can be discovered

through increased disclosure, and that's one
of the things to push, but it is not the only

way that we will move along this path way.

A lot will come from the relative economics
but of course the relative economics can be

more greatly defined by the disclosure around
those projects et cetera.

Let's hone in on that for a moment.

This disclosure issue is an important one
and a fundamental one.

Anybody want to jump?

In?

I'm particularly interested to understand
how that will get rolled out.

How does that become a practical instrument?

When you read the reports, there are fantastic
reports what they're doing in the renewable

space.

They look great.

When you look at the numbers, then, inside
it, you wonder, if they spend 25 to 30 billion

over four years, in their CAPEX programme,
renewables is only one to two billion.

That's five per cent.

Are they really going to move the needle with
that?

I think we need to have understanding for
these companies trying to make first of all

the mentally but then they have to adjust
their business.

They've got all this huge equipment.

We should not forget that we still need to
use fossil fuel for quite a number of time.

The transition will be slow, but I suspect
it will be rather abrupt but I think I've

got two investors here who will have a better
view than mine.

We make these things complicated for no reason.

The bottom line is simple.

There's an enormous amount of opportunity
and need for additional power capacity.

We are in that space.

Big projects in the middle of right now, financing
1.3 billion dollars, the largest renewable

energy product.

Our own equity is 700 million dollars going
into the project.

There are plenty of them.

The return on that project is not three per
cent, by the way.

It will be more like eight per cent, nine
per cent, okay?

So, there is a - the transition will need
- inevitably, it is going to need to happen

over a decade.

If you take a decade as an horizon, the fundamental
need is not denial.

That's the problem right now.

Everybody is in - there is a whole bunch of
people who own that fossil fuel-based asset

platform who are in denial, who are not willing
to recognise what is going to happen.

So, fine.

They're going to go bankrupt.

The alternative for them, whether Shell, BP,
or a utility, is for them to say, "Let me

phase out, go from what I'm earning today,
five per cent, seven per cent, whatever it

is return, I accept the fact that, over the
next ten years it's going to become zero,

and I'm going to write this lot off, so it's
going to be less than zero, and, at the same

time, let's start instead of doing two billion
out of the 20 billion of my, or 30 billion

of my CAPEX, let me start putting it the other
way around, 18 billion of our CAPEX into renewable

energy where I start ramping up my eight or
nine per cent return on investment, stable

long-term assets."

Over the ten-year horizon, fine.

I'm not going to get my stable eight per cent
- which, by the way will go bankrupt quickly

- on average, I'm going to level out at five
per cent for that transitionary period.

Thereafter, I can look forward to my seven
or eight, whatever.

It is not very difficult.

The biggest issue is disclosure.

Disclosure to themselves, first.

Why is it that the kingdom of Saudi Arabia
suddenly embraced renewable energy?

For a very simple reason.

They started to account for the - believe
it or not - they were just subsidising, subsidising.

It was no big deal, and suddenly they started
to calculate the subsidies, because oil prices

were crashing, the economy was in trouble.

It is time to account for it properly.

When you start to account for it properly,
they say man, this is crazy.

Particularly in an era where there was renewable
energy that was at a shockingly lower price.

What do you see?

All of a sudden, an enormous drive towards
renewable energy.

You will see Saudi Arabia decommissioning
something like 40,000 megawatts of oil-fired

power plants in the next five years.

You mean subsidies of fossil fuels?

In that case, yes.

This point of disclosure is really interesting,
because it is difficult for the large fossil

fuel companies to provide an amount of transparency
that is being sought.

We had to task for some climate disclosures
led by Mark Carney and Mayor Bloomberg.

Do you want to see those disclosures and/or
not invest?

How we are going to transition.

I think the Swedes switching from left-hand
driving with right-hand driving, and, after

long debate, decided to switch the trucks
first and cars three months later!

That's what we are proposing here.

There is no way on earth any of these oil
companies and car companies will be around,

because two cents per kilowatt hour of solar
is competitive at four dollars a barrel.

If I as a director of Shell make an investment
into lift oil four dollars of barrel, I'm

destroying shareholder value.

Oil, gas, and coal companies will disappear
because they are wasting money.

Yes, we will consume, gas, and oil for a few
years, but any investment is crazy, it increases

the carbon bubble and will cause a global
financial crash.

The mortgage bubble was 15 million dollars
of write-offs, we're talking already 23 trillion

for the gas and oil, and coal companies.

Please give in mind as savers, policymakers,
you can't shift gradually.

Any penny invested into oil exploration and
power plants is money which will cause a global

crash.

[Applause].

It's very important, but also what we think
we need to do.

Germany has a dramatic history.

Our enemy here is only 1.5 per cent of GDP
of investment to stop climate change before

for a German, that's 750 euros a year.

That's the price of a fake Gucci bag, I always
say.

We have to make these investments.

It is urgent to make them.

It is time to stop the nonsense.

For example, a neighbour of mine, a former
minister, drives around with a car with with

an E sign on it, a Mercedes 500, with an electric
drive in there.

That's lying to us.

The same that ESG is all lies.

BP is 95 per cent ESG compliant.

We have a woman on the board, and we have
a hard hat when he works, but they still cause

climate change and the end of our future of
humanity, so the normal in finance, I was

invited to speak at the keynote in the Berlin
Return Summit, is risk, return, impact.

Nobody ever wanted to be invested in a company
that destroys our future.

80 per cent of surveyed pensioners in Holland
want to have a positive impact with investments.

The normal things that any economist learns
is what it the externality?

So it's risk, return, and externality.

That is the new normal.

This will be no question.

What we need to change in terms of disclosure
is account honestly for the externality.

The key externality at the moment is the cost
of carbon.

It's 60 euros of local health cost, 70 euros
of global climate cost.

130 is what we cause with the C02 emissions.

That's why the Swede prize these things - congratulations
- but we subsidise production of energy.

In Germany, if you have a high energy consumption,
we make you pay a lower electricity price,

so the average price for C02 globally is minus
152 euros per tonne.

Have you calculated what your business plan
looks like with 130 euros a tonne.

Not one member of the Dow Jones Index, except
Western Union, survived - no whip maker became

a spark maker.

No carriage maker became a car maker.

Kodak invented the digital camera and disappeared.

Germany invented energy transition, but if
we do not move, we have a million people because

the car-makers making the combustion engine
will disappear.

It is a great opportunity to make money on
the long and short side, and in terms of disclosure

ask them what is your CO2 price used in calculating
a business model is the key statistic we look

for.

[Applause].

The pricing 
on carbon is a critical one.

How does BlackRock 
look at this?

I think the end invests don't normally look
at disclosures.

It is for us as a manager to translate those
disclosures into real numbers and real risks.

And then create products which take into account
those risks.

I think to echo your point, I think we looked
at some statistics.

I think there are 1,500 companies or so that
use some type of carbon pricing internally.

The price range is half -- I think it is one
dollar, up to 150 dollars.

I mean, that's, if there is any policy you
can do to create a global carbon price, that

will have a huge impact.

That is the biggest impact, and that's going
to be the biggest and most important disclosure

because it is going to be a real cost at some
point in time.

It is not quite there yet.

That is two important messages for the panel
which take place in the room after lunch which

is the public finance angle to financing the
transition.

The carbon price and clear disclosures, but
clear disclosures in and of itself don't yet

drive the individual pension holder or investors,
and there is on top of that the challenge

of the timing.

Just two weeks ago, Goldman Sachs put out
a report that said the outlook for the oil

industry for the next five to ten years is
quite a positive one.

The oil industry has been under investing
in exploration, demand is picking back up,

and therefore, at least in the short term,
we are going to see an uptick in oil prices,

and an uptick in returns for the oil industry.

How do we get that timing right?

What are the tipping points, and what will
determine the speed at which this happens?

If you are short for too long, then you might
run out of money, right?

Smart being short.

Zoë, Kingsmill, do you guys have any insight
or views on this?

How do we project or see the tipping points
clearly enough?

Going back to the Goldman Sachs report, Goldman
Sachs are an investment bank and they service

oil companies.

They're somewhat bound to say what they said.

Furthermore, they are receiving business-as-usual
as everyone does in the oil sector.

They're not taking into account the fact that
you're going to see different demand destruction

and Paddy mentioned Saudi Arabia shutting
down power.

There is a lot change coming.

It is not recognised at all by the oil sector,
or by the investment banks.

So, if I may cover that question.

Coming to the other point about the speed
of change.

It is - the point people need to recognise
is that marginal change is two orders of magnitude

- sorry, requires change two orders of magnitude
smaller than total change.

If total demand is 100 units, change is one
unit.

For that one unit to switch from positive
to negative can happen quickly.

Look at the UK.

Within 12 months, we've closed down our entire
coal-fired power generation sector.

I think this marginal change history shows
can and will happen extremely rapidly, and

people make two mistakes.

They don't understand either how fast marginal
change can happen, and they don't understand

the impact of marginal change on their businesses
which, as a number of people have said, is

very dramatic.

What are the tipping points you look for,
Zoë?

So this fits nicely into the disclosure point
as well which I keep coming back to, but it

comes into the scenario element on the task-force
of related disclosure recommendations.

So, clearly, the oil and gas forecast that
Goldman's are putting out is based on their

own assumption of GDP capacity, et cetera,
and everybody will have a different view on

that.

This brings me back to the point around expectations,
and the linkage between disclosure and expectations

because that's what allows the market to take
a different viewpoint and price the risk,

the climate risk that they are prepared to
take on accordingly.

What is going to measure the speed of change
is it is looking at demand forecasts which

tend to be a little bit backward looking.

It's going to be thinking about pricing - looking
more explicitly about the differences between,

or the correlation between pricing and GDP,
and energy efficiency, and technology innovation,

and trying to map those components a little
bit more accurately, which I don't think we

are particularly good at in the past.

Kingsmill pointed out people tend to stick
to business-as-usual methodology when thinking

about growth forecasts, et cetera, and we're
not challenging and kicking the tyres of what

that electrification process looks like for
the future of oil.

The speed of change, well, it's an area that
needs a lot more work.

Figuring out those data points we all should
be looking at to identify how far on track

are countries to fulfil their Paris plans
that they put forward two or three years ago?

And looking at what the global stock take
might throw up in 2023 is too far out for

that.

We need to be thinking about this now.

To flag up the point that Paddy made earlier,
it was absolutely the Saudi Arabian plan for

Paris that made us all step up and think a
little bit more.

This move from moving away from oil-powered
desalination facilities to solar-powered desalination

facilities and saying we want to be part of
capture and storage, that is a clear signals,

and these kind of signals that haven't been
picked up on historically which will be picked

on more in the future to be incorporated into
business-as-usual projections so the models

evolve.

I agree with Zoë in the sense that it is
difficult that these things never happen quietly

and gradually.

There is always a traumatic event that happens
and then some of the discontinuities that

we see, the debate on diesel, when they become
active, it became active after a fraud by

Volkswagen.

Suddenly, you have Saudi Arabia announcing
a big solar project and people stop and think

what the impact is.

The reality shall the hardest thing for investor
is to know what is going to happen, because,

for a while, you're going to sell the stocks,
and see the stocks run away from you, and

they will be one of the most frustrating things
that you can do.

But the reality is that, when the shock happens,
there will be no way out.

And we've seen it time and time again in my
history in investment banking where, and those

are cases of fraud, that people kept on giving
loans to companies without having really read

the balance sheet.

Most - the broader investors probably don't
read between the lines and don't think about

what the consequences are.

Probably, policymakers have a big role in
pushing this, because they're the ones that

will force, by forcing companies to account
for the carbon cost, they're probably the

ones that can bring the shift to a much more
alive and to a certain extent painful stage.

Before we switch to the next subject, Paddy?

Moving away from power generation and looking
at electric vehicles.

There are hell of a lot of people out there
sitting doing calculations like so many billion

units of vehicle out there, current stock,
replace that into electric is going to take

so much of production capacity, et cetera.

It's completely missing the point that user
behaviour has completely changed.

You know what is going to happen?

Within the next very likely what is going
to happen is, in the next ten years, we are

still going to have those 500 million or 800
million units of cars, but they're going to

stay in our garage because all of us who have
got cars and maybe two or three, will keep

them in the garage and we will be calling
on Uber because it is peanuts.

It will be so cheap and convenient, and that
Uber will be electric.

The number of Ubers required will be hell
of a lot less, because our cars get used for

five per cent of the day, whereas the Uber
gets used for 95 per cent of the day.

All of a sudden, you don't need so many units,
so, all of a sudden, you don't need so much

of manufacturing capacity.

So, it is very much that sort of very difficult
for us to change the way we conventionally

think.

We continue to think, that is causing the
problem here as well.

I'm not a Catholic but a big fan of Pope Francis.

He decided to accept on his 80th birthday
an electric car.

Why?

Because the 20,000 euro car saves you 1,000
euros a year, so the same price as a 16,000

Ford Focus.

We hope to turn the Vatican to 100 per cent
renewable power and transport because it makes

sense.

Who has a guess how many Chinese travel 100
per cent electric to work every day?

In Germany, 150,000 electric cars is roughly
as many electric cars the Chinese put on the

road every month.

How many Chinese including bikes, scooters,
and electric cars do you think there?

100 per cent electric.

A bottle of champagne if you're ten per cent
within?

Kingsmill has a bid in on 300 million!

250 million.

I think that's a bottle of champagne there?

[Applause].

250 million Chinese cycle to work, put the
electric battery on the back, plug it in,

and go.

250 million Chinese.

It is not some government decided, it is market.

It's the reality, it is happening now, and
there we go.

I want to alert all of you that, in a few
minutes, we will be opening up to questions.

Please submit your questions to Janelle, Ms
Twitter, so we can engage you in our debate.

We still have the hard-to-abate sectors, the
speed of transition to electricity.

A positive note on electric mobility and start
vehicles and what that will do for energy

demand which relates, as it relates to passenger
transport.

But then there is still steel.

Then there is still cement.

Shipping and aviation.

There are a few battles that we have to work
through.

Do we see in innovation, in the financing
of innovation, and enough capital momentum

in the decarbonisation of those sectors?

This has been one of my most amazing days,
thanks to the tech festival taking place Monday

and yesterday, drawdown, the technology is
out there - amazing.

We have a portfolio company that makes concrete
floors at twice the speed and with 40 per

cent less cement.

They are a German company in a makes solar
wafers with half the energy.

You can make steel with zero emissions.

All of that is possible.

It is a matter of scaling it up.

It is very difficult because there are incumbents
in Germany.

This concrete floor company has Ikea, Lidl,
Aldi, in America, in the northern European

countries in France but can't get into Germany
because we are so conservative in Germany.

Just like the great British Empire missed
the second industrial revolution.

We invented the second industrial revolution.

The other sectors, I see great companies,
and there is a shortage of capital.

Thanks to block chain, hopefully, there will
be more investments coming into this area,

democratise these great opportunities.

They are fantastic business opportunities
out there.

I do think Zoë is on to something, and highlighted
in a previous panel about heat and transport.

One of the key challenges we see with investing
into renewable projects is we are in essentially

a deflationary environment.

Renewables become cheaper all the time.

Why would I invest tomorrow when I can invest
that year's time by having something cheaper?

I do that by having a long-term contract.

That's how I secure my return.

The challenge today is there are not enough
of those long-term contracts.

I think that industrial processes and transport,
given that you have particularly now shipping,

and those big types of transport, could play
a big role in marrying the two together.

So, for example, if steel companies can bring
hydrogen into their industrial processes,

cheap power to produce hydrogen, those things
will naturally come together, so I think then,

obviously technology will have to solve itself
as well.

It is not peanuts, but I think that's, I'm
hoping, in a will be a major trend over the

next ten years.

Again, policy is important, but I think what
is going to happen even on the industrials

is markets are going to drive.

It is already starting to drive it.

Where you're seeing energy prised correctly,
subsidies being removed, industries are recalibrating

and looking at renewables because renewables
have become - in Morocco, we are supplying

renewable energy wind power to three cement
companies.

Companies.

For a simple reason, not because they said
I want to save the world, it's because it

is it is the most cost-exceptive way to get
the energy they need, and they are energy-intensive.

In Saudi Arabia, all industrial companies
are busy repricing, looking at what their

medium-term options are because they see only
one trajectory for the cost of energy, because

there's a very publicly declared policy that,
by 2030, it will be zero subsidy for oil and

gas by 2020.

When they recalculate on the full price and
compare it with renewable options.

Some of the heavier industries like steel,
because they will need a significant amount

of capital retrofit, it will take time.

It is just a matter of time.

Again, markets will drive this.

I hear you talking about this concept that
electrons will become so abundant, ubiquitous

and cheap, it will force the transition in
other industries, but there is still the power

of incumbency, there is still the existing
infrastructure and the existing asset base

that is not yet written off, or it is still
producing value at marginal cost, so, how

does this play out in the political economy?

I can see it in Saudi Arabia because you have
had these subsidies on oil and gas that are

going away, but elsewhere in the world?

Anybody?

It's highly appropriate that, at this forum,
the global commission on geopolitics has been

launched, because part of the answer to your
question is countries which embrace this change

will rise to geopolitical leadership, and
countries which ignore it and resist it will,

as was said, the British Empire will sink
in insignificance.

The message to policymakers is do nothing
at your peril because you will become irrelevant.

The temptation is there, I can't resist it,
I guess, this is a financial markets and capital

panel, we don't have a single American on
the panel, and that last comment is a very

relative one.

I was born in America!

Can you please answer on behalf of Mr Trump!

A wonderful discussion with Professor - he
said, that before a phase-change happens in

physics, there is great volatility, like in
markets.

He thinks Mr Trump is a blessing, because
if he goes out there and says, "I will push

coal, and even with the support of the Republican
party in America, building in Houston, Texas

power plants," is a blessing.

So he reminds us that we care about human
rights.

He reminds us in Germany and in the European
Union that we have to embrace this green industrial

revolution, because, if we don't embrace it,
people like him will rule the world.

He is a blessing, and thank you very much,
Mr Trump!

That's a contrarian point of view.

Silent!

[Applause].

I think it is time to see what you want to
know from us.

I'm going to look at Ms Twitter.

Janelle, what can you bring to the discussion?

Well, we have quite a few comments.

This was quite an active panel in terms of
Twitter.

So let's start with a particularly spicy one
from Mr Andreas Kramer, "There are no stranded

assets in Energiewende, energy transformation.

Don't believe what the investors believe you
on their BETD panel.

They perpetuate the myth for self-interest."

I wanted a spicy discussion, and I'm keen
to understand that a little bit better.

I wish we had microphones on the floor.

But is it that some of the investors are fooling
themselves, are mistakenly thinking that there

will be a process whereby stranded assets
will be addressed and where we will sort it,

or is the reality of the market just going
to be that they're going to get wiped out?

That will probably be your view, Kingsmill?

The issue of stranded assets, briefly to address
Mr Kramer's observation, as I mentioned already,

$200 billion of electricity generation capacity
in Europe has been written off in the last

ten years.

That is stranded assets from our calculation.

66 per cent of all European coal generation
capacity is currently running at an operating

cost lower than the wholesale price.

That's stranded assets.

More than half of US coal capacity is stranded
assets.

There are stranded - sorry, 20 per cent of
refining capacity globally is running at an

operating loss.

There are loads of stranded assets.

From our calculation, 1,300 billion dollars
of stranded assets today, and that's going

to increase every single month.

Thank you.

I'm going to talk to you, Sverker, because
in the index funds which undoubtedly make

up a big part of the portfolios of BlackRock,
you're, say, condemned, forced to only fossil

fuel companies that you may have concerns
about their long-term financial sustainability.

At the same time, I heard, or I read a letter
from earlier this year where it is us as capitalists

that have to I can the lead in making this
transition happen.

We have a much more important role now.

How do you reconcile these things, not being
able to divest from companies still embedded

in the fossil fuel industry, the ones that
Andreas think we close our eyes for, yet the

call that Larry had for strong, bold leadership?

That's a good we.

Let me try to answer it.

Two things are happening.

Index funds can't exclude any company in that
index.

However, an index can include certain sectors.

My point as I was making before is we see
a lot more demand for an index that - take

SNP or certain types of fossil fuels.

An asset 500, if we see that oil and gas companies
decrease in value, they're going to naturally

fall out of those indices as well.

The third answer to your question is what
Larry was asking for was long-termism, is

what he likes to talk about.

What that means, he was trying to define it
as a sense of purpose.

Takings into account, having a long-term strategy
around climate change is a sense of purpose.

And whether that means BNP getting into solar
and trying to say mothball part of their old

plants, that is for BP to set that strategy
but long-termism, not focusing on the next

quarter but the next ten or 20 years because
we are always going to only those companies

as part of the index.

Another question is who is going to pay for
the stranded assets?

If a company's assets are finished, their
useful life, then I guess you can depreciate

them over time.

You can write them off.

There are a lot cases, and certainly in my
cub, in Italy, there was a case with the defacing

of the nuclear - the dephasing of the nuclear
industry, the consumer was paying for the

stranded assets.

But governments have intervened to subsidise
the cost of taking their bad loans off the

banks' books, so the reality is that ultimately,
it is going to be a cost for society which

is probably unfair because an investor at
least takes an active decision to put his

money somewhere in a particular stock, even
though he doesn't know anything about it.

But it is his decision, but the average person
is not their decision.

So it could end up being a social cost.

Can we go to the next question, Janelle, and
talk about development?

This question, "How should development banks
and ... like Ecuador principles, so that local

communities' rights are respected?"

Paddy, you're the most experienced in this
field?

Well, others involved as well, because equated
products and equated principles, in fact,

we've come a long way over the last decade
in this.

So I'm happy to say that the international
community of lenders, private sector as well

as the public sector, is not going to invest
a single dollar on a project that does not

comply with the Ecuador principles, and the
environmental laws and standards, so there

is a lot of work that goes into structuring
projects, and quite often, it is this, looking

at the - ensuring compliance, and making sure
that studies are done, and community rights

are included, consultations take place, and
so on, that takes the time in project development,

not the technical side of it, not the project-financing
side, but getting this done.

There's a lot of work.

This is not that much of an issue.

I think we continue to improve on this.

I think the next step for us is to somehow
find a way to get communities to have some

ownership in the assets that we develop.

Quite a lot of, you know, talking of power
generation, typically power plants are located

in the middle of nowhere - fairly remote places
- but, unsurprisingly, even in the richest

place, you have people living there, and those
are the people who are the most disadvantaged

and underprivileged, and so, for the moment,
what we are doing is we're consulting them,

and we're making sure we are throwing a little
bit of social responsibility, funding to develop

them, and so on, and so forth, but we can
move along and make sure that they, given

the fact that that asset is going to be there
for 30 or 40 years, there should be a way

of getting those people to start having a
shareholding and benefit on a annuity stream

over time, like South African empowerment
laws have required us to do.

I think there is a - so we can continue to
build on this, but right now, it's not an

issue, or not a significant issue.

Would other folks agree with that?

I wanted from the Germany energy transition,
one of the lessons was that having broad participation

matters a lot.

Like ten blokes getting together for beer
at night and they decide to put up the equity

to get one windmill.

That's how we get them.

One guy decides to put up a solar panel, So
participation, I think, is key.

I was just itching before to reply to the
question that we're just saying these things

because we're investors in renewables.

In the case of the German Energy Transition
Fund, we have 24 billion euros in cash given

to us.

No, we're not at the moment holders of anything.

But if we think how to invest this money long-term
to pay for the nuclear clean-up that we have

to pay for, then it's obvious to us that we
can't possibly invest in industries which

we expect to disappear.

And, in terms of why you think what you think,
very intelligent guy, the head of one of the

biggest equity funds in the world asked me
the other day, "Thank you for the nice speech

here, but doesn't a solar panel needs more
energy to make it than it ever generates."

This is one of the most famous people in private
equity.

How can someone as smart of this running hundreds
of billions ask me this question?

The answer I learned is, "Yes, sir, and that
was the truth 50 years ago.

The reason you think the way you do is that
the election budget of the Green Party in

Germany is five million euros but Exxon spends
five billion dollars denying climate change."

We just can't get it.

How can something so obvious not be understood
by so many intelligent people?

And the answer is, you know, huge amounts
of money, I would estimate, 5,000 billion

- five million being spent on nonsense like
electric cars have range issues.

We have a portfolio company where you drive
along the highway.

Your battery is going down, the self-driving
battery and wheels leaves the parking lot,

connects to me while I'm driving, and drives
its way back.

You all think that electric cars are either
expensive or have range issues.

It is all history.

It is moving gradually.

So, please, it is not talking for our own
books, or pockets, we are trying to pass the

message that we all should please as our banks,
do not use our money to lend it to oil, gas,

and coal companies, because you're destroying
our savings.

Thank you very much.

[Applause].

Let's go to the next question.

I meant the Ecuador principles, highlighted
to me that I read that wrong.

Thank you very much.

Are we, with stranded asset where shall I
read out the question?

Another one.

This is for Mr Wermuth.

Huge shortage of capital investing in innovative
projects paving the way for more conventional

infrastructure investors.

Who could play that role?

Private sector venture capital, impact investors,
or the broad bank - World Bank, et cetera?

I think that Hans Konig is right that we've
talked upbeat for the capital infrastructure,

and the start-ups, the struggle of funding
in the early stages is not an easy one.

What is your view?

There is a huge shortage of capital, so, when
we try to, when you buy out an investor in

Europe or America today, you find yourselves
at the notary five different funds competing

to buy a company at a crazy price like, I
don't know what.

If you go to growth stage, or early-stage
seed money, there's a huge shortage, and I

think there are models like how the Silicon
Valley appeared, or how Israel became a start-up

nation, where Israel said, "I give you equity
into a fund, and you, if you do well, fund

manager, pay as a three per cent return, but
if things go bad, I participate in the downside."

I think it is really important to maybe not
to do a Soviet socially . Approach of throwing

money at these things but matching private
funds, one for one, I think is a good way

of stimulating these industries.

I think each of us, if we tell our banks please
give me a green bank account, do not use the

money to lend to these guys, and, if we invest
in green bonds and exclude the fossil fuel

companies, at, if we all invest via block
chain mechanisms into start-up companies,

I think we can have a huge impact.

Yesterday, the winner of the Special STG Prize,
a company that has briquettes, you know how

much energy - you know how much investment
they're looking for?

50,000 dollars.

In this room, we could do this deal today,
but they've been looking looking for two years.

They can't get $250,000 for a technology that
cuts emissions by 90 per cent, and reducing

death rates, yes, four million people dying
from smoke.

They can't raise the money.

So, it's up to us to become more entrepreneurial.

As was said the other day, we used to be a
start-up nation, all of us.

Now we have big salaries coming from the big,
coal, and gas, and nobody wants to be entrepreneurs.

If we have 10,000 euros of private saves,
we need to be entrepreneurs, invest in these

great new companies and help them.

Is a passionate plea, and not easy.

I see bold moves elsewhere, timing in Saudi
Arabia, soft bank teamed up with your government

to look at what can be done.

Is the tide shifting?

Clearly, so, the foundation of the Vision
Fund, the 100 billion dollar innovation fund

is very much to do with investing in new technology,
investing exactly in the future, world-changing

opportunities.

As part and parcel of diversifying the Saudi
economy.

Removing, I mean, there is a very publicly
stated policy that says, by 2030, the Kingdom

of Saudi Arabia does not want to rely on a
single dollar of oil revenue.

Just to be clear, that does not mean they're
going to stop selling oil, if you want to

buy it, keep buying it, that is your problem
or our opportunity, but we're not going to

work on the basis that there is going to be
a market out there for it by 2030.

Not one dollar, so, as part of that.

So there is a lot of money.

The issue around this question is to do even
in this world of so much of connectivity,

bringing opportunities together with capital
is not easy.

That's the problem.

So, you're a small entrepreneur, you've developed
this wonderful idea, you put all your effort

into developing that wonderful idea, maybe
you're a socially savvy person, but at the

same time, you're not geared up to the world
of capital and how to tap into the Vision

Fund, the 100 billion dollar fund sitting
out there.

That's one of the challenges.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has fully embraced
the idea of energy transition.

I think everybody is aware a few weeks ago,
they launched this 200 gigawatts by 2030 ambition

to create a solar industry in the kingdom.

Okay, that all sounds crazy but, in fact,
it isn't.

First of all, please realise that 200 gigawatts
is photovoltaic, so only when the sun is shining.

So, a country that 

is consuming, or that is expected to consume
by 2030, 125 gigawatts, to have 70 coming

from PV or solar, is not unrealistic.

That is not a crazy ambition.

Very doable.

Why did they jump into it?

Again, money talks.

We have just started construction on the first
utility-scale plant in the Kingdom, through

a competitive bid.

2.34 cents per kilowatt hour when the sun
is shining.

Fixed price, 25-year contract.

2.54 cents.

Even Saudi Arabia, which is - which has got
the lowest cost of oil extraction cannot supply

oil or gas, or whatever, to put into a power
plant and produce electricity when the sun

is shining at 2.34.

So that is the simple reason.

So, coming back to this funding issue, it
is very much a case of how to connect but

there is a lot more money on the back of - so,
the Vision Fund is the one that is famous

because it's 100 billion dollars, but a hell
of a lot of other money that is out there.

Starting with your 24 billion.

Shall we go to 
the next question?

Liberalisation 20 years ago, the risks of
merchant generation were totally underestimated.

How do the risks of renewable investment look,
and is capital prised correctly?

You already alluded to this in your introduction
that long-term PPAs versus merchants is an

interesting development in the renewables
arena?

Exactly.

What we have gone through is obviously a world
which requires subsidies to a world without

subsidies, but, frequently, those subsidies
have also come with a long-term contract.

There are two purposes: bridging the gap between
power prices - or merchant prices - and the

required price, and providing a long-term
offtake.

that is not going to be in the future.

In the future also, if it continues to go
down, there's a risk, that power prices will

come down as well, on the back of that.

So, capital price correctly, well, that's
a good question.

We will come back to that.

I think we need more bilateral contracts,
more corporates coming in, and I think that

comes back to the industrial processes, heat,
transport, et cetera.

I think we also need to start maybe thinking
slightly differently about how we do renewables.

Maybe you don't do a renewable project individually.

Maybe what you do, is you develop the next
type of utility.

It has flexible generation on one side, and
renewables on the other side, batteries, and

then you combine them into a kind of second-type
generation of utility, or IPP.

If capital is prised correctly today, there
is a wealth of capital.

We operate in OSCD markets.

Is capital prised correctly anywhere today?

It is extremely cheap, but we will see changes
in that going forward.

I've heard from a couple of utilities of the
mumblings of a zero price of energy scenario.

What does that mean?

Of course, if you need equipment to generate
energy, you can't have a zero price energy.

But, the fact is, I alluded in my introductory
speech that the cost of the solution is what

clients are, or customers are more interested
on, so I think that what a lot of utilities

are now looking to do is how can they package
together a solution which comes with maintenance

contracts and comes at taking the plant off
their balance sheet and running it for them.

You know, insurance coverage, et cetera, so
I think that the whole model or servicing

client will change, that will make the cost
of the energy rebundled into a broader bucket

of services, and therefore, less material
to the overall, to their overall cost that

the client is paying for.

The clock is ticking on, and the programme
has a bit of confusing message.

We're supposed to start lunch at 12.30.

I don't want you to lose the opportunity to
have lunch, so I am going to ask and thank

you, Janelle.

I'm going to ask my fellow panellists for
one final insight to wrap things up, and I'm

going to start over on my left-hand side so
we can wrap up on time and give you a chance

to enjoy your lunch break and meet colleagues
and friends.

What is your final insight from listening
to this inspired conversation?

I learned a lot from you guys.

Thank you.

I maybe here because I met a Nobel Prize winner
in one place in another time, and he said

I'm not in favour of renewables because I'm
a democrat.

I really look forward to the world that's
ahead of us, a world where indeed the marginal

cost of power is zero, where we have a portfolio
company in Berlin with a Fintech company that

is a allowed to put a solar panel anywhere
in the world, and sell power to this person

to have a light and a computer, and charging
points profitably.

We can lift 2 billion people out of disconnected
on a pro-business basis.

We look forward to a wonderful world where
the block chain allows us more direct access

to pool capital for great ideas around the
world, where people are more connected, where

would be thanks to the social media, there
is a social immediate - there is a policeman

in Russia collecting bribes every day, a little
girl can film him and publish it, so people

will get to more disclosures, the markets
will drive this.

I think it is a wonderful world.

It is a world full of risks of people not
going there, and there is a risk that people

of course use our private data then to take
away our ability to think straight because

we don't know what to believe any more but
I hope we stay intelligent enough and will

make this a wonderful transition.

I'm quite optimistic, thank you.

Spoke of democratisation of energy, probably
the socialisation of energy, for the fact

that it's going - the fact that it has been
decentralised is the most powerful thing for

all consumers.

I heard a statistic that in Germany in the
early 1990s, there were 1,000 power plants

that power the economy, and 1.6 million smaller
power plants feeding into the grid.

This tells you there's been a democratisation,
whatever you want to talk about.

The next stage of the development of emerging
economies, and we heard about Africa this

morning with a very vibrant speaker in the
first session, that it's this decentralised

model will provide a lot of opportunities
in many parts of the world.

We have a lot to look forward to, and it will
be quick.

It won't be gradual, it will be sudden.

The capital is definitely there.

The cost of renewables is competitive but
probably not enough good projects, and there's

not enough long-term contracts, and we also
lack a global carbon tax and a global carbon

price.

So there is a lot of discussion around when
is the energy transition going to start?

In our view, it has already started.

Energy transition isn't something like any
transition that will happen overnight.

I think this one will be fairly fast.

It has already started.

I think the day solar energy kinds of crossed
the five-cent threshold was probably about

the timing.

We will expect - we will see a different world
in my view by 2020.

That's my take.

So I've got a degree of optimism as well.

I think that the transition will happen more
quickly than is expected by many now.

I have - I also have a degree of optimism
in the sense that in the last 12 months, I

think there's been a step change in the seriousness
of intent of addressing the fossil fuel side,

both from the fossil fuel companies themselves,
from banks and the financial system, and investors,

and civil society players.

I think you need all of those ingredients
to speed up change.

I do still think that the disclosure side
is important that will be pushed forward,

but I think that that increased participation
of a whole variety of stakeholders, whether

it is civil society, compared with policy-makers
and banks, means that this, the energy transition,

will move quite quickly from here on.

Kingsmill, you had the first and the final
word.

I would like to emphasise the energy return
on investment of solar is now higher than

that of marginal oil, which creates an entirely
new world.

We should think of previous energy transitions,
sailing ships, of canals, gas lighting, horsing,

all of which have vanished in their original
concept, and the answer is ten per cent.

When solar and wind make up ten per cent of
global energy, that is the transition point.

The I totally agree with Paddy, we're in the
middle of that change, and 2020, 2021 with

is when turns, thank you.

It is time to go back to Ms Twitter.

Janelle, can you let us know what was the
assessment of this group?

Let's see if you all agreed with the podium
here.

The majority do seem to agree with the podium.

We have 2020 as the answer for 65 per cent
of our respondents.

24 per cent say this will really take off
in 2030.

Nobody thinks it will take off in 2040, while
11 per cent are a bit more pessimistic or

realistic, depending on which side you stand
on the forum.

They say - spectrum.

They say it will be too late.

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for attending
here.

One important practical announcement: In this
room, the Weltsaal, the World Room, the leveraging

public finance in future energy markets panel
will take place after lunch, so, contrary

to your programme, the public finance panel
will be in this room, and mobility discussion,

future mobility will happen in the Europa
Salle.

Have a nice day.

Thank you.


