And i know you have divided up what you regard
the key findings of the study.

There is a division of labour here, so, without
further ado, I would like you to present each

of your sections and then, perhaps, afterwards,
we will have time for a brief exchange.

We will begin with Rana Adib.

She is Executive Secretary of REN21.

It is a global public-private multi-stakeholder
network on renewable energy that's headquartered

at the United Nations Environment Programme
in Paris, France.

She will be followed straightaway by Diala
Hawila, Associate Programme Officer in the

policy unit of IRENA, working on topics related
to policy assessment, and focusing, amongst

others, on renewable energy auctions.

Finally, we will hear from the man in the
middle, Paolo Frankl, Head of the Renewable

Energy Division at the IEA.

He provides policy advice in the areas of
technology, markets, and system integration.

Rana Adib, please begin.

Unfortunately, maybe for here, or fortunately,
actually, we have changed order.

We just wanted to test basically the spontaneity
of our audience.

Diala is going to start.

Sorry!

I'm from the International Renewable Agency.

I'm happy and honoured to be with you here
today, and to share this presentation with

to present our report on renewable energies
in a time of transition.

This is the first time the three institutions
come together to deliver messages on policy

recommendations on how further to deploy renewable
energy, and to advance the energy transition

globally.

So far, we have presented the findings of
the report in major events like the G20 and

IRENA's major assembly in January.

Through those presentations, we have received
very valuable feedback, and also we have had

more than 1,000 reviewers for our reports,
many of whom are here today, and thank you

for your feedback.

In this report, we look at policies in the
power sector, in heating and cooling, and,

in transport.

We look at measures in order to integrate
renewable energy into the system, and we also

propose an updated classification of renewable
energy policies that places those policies

in a broader context of other policies not
only related to the energy sector itself.

So, renewable energy deployment has made major
strides in the past decade, driven mainly

by technological advancement, cost reductions,
and, of course, renewable energy policies.

However, the progress has not been homogeneous
across countries, and new developing markets,

we still face barriers related to technology,
to finance, to regulatory barriers, and, in

an advanced market with a large share of renewable
energy, we're now facing challenges that are

related to the integration of variable renewable
energy.

This progress is not homogeneous across sectors,
and while we can see the number of countries

with targets and policies for renewable energy
has been increasing in a staggering way, they

still focus on the policies of the power sector.

Today, the it will focus on the variable system
integration on renewable energy and on policies

to advance sectors in heating, and transport,
which are the main consumers of energy globally.

Before that, a few words on the policies and
in the power sector.

Today, we see that the still most widely adopted
policy is tax incentives and tax reductions,

and this is because they can be applied to
projects from all sizes and installations,

and in all contexts, especially the access
context as we saw previously in the session

before.

For those to be successful, they need to be
of course coupled with regulatory policies,

capacity measures, and finance access measures,
and other also policies.

Tariffs and premiums are the second most widely
adopted policies, and they've made a major

role in deploying renewables globally.

One challenge associated with feed-in tariffs
that are administratively set tariffs and

premiums is they need to be set - there is
a challenge in setting the tariff, and in

adapting the tariff to reflect changing market
conditions such as the falling cost of technologies,

while, at the same time, providing a stable
environment for investments.

And this is why lately auctions have been
increasingly adopted because of their ability

to capture the real price of a technology
in a specific context, and also fulfil other

policy objectives.

So, as mentioned, auctions have been able
to reflect the falling costs of technologies

between 2010 and 2016 specifically for onshore
wind and solar PV, and we have seen lately

record-breaking prices in all regions of the
world in all technologies, but it is very

important to highlight the factors that are
behind the prices that we are seeing, and

that those prices are not necessarily replicable
in any context.

They can categorised in the country-specific
factors such as cost of land, labour, and

resources.

The investors' confidence, such as the uptaker's
risks.

Other policies can also be applied at the
same time such as, for example, tax incentives,

and also the design of the auction.

The auction can be designed in a way to account
for trade-offs between the lowest price achieved

and other objectives.

It is very important to highlight that auctions
are also associated with weaknesses such as

they could probably drive small players out
of the market, or they could sometimes result

in underbidding and delays if they're not
designed appropriately.

So this is why it is very important to highlight
that the choice of policy is not always the

same in any context, and some context, it
is very context-specific to the technology,

to the left of maturity of the sector, and
also, it is important to highlight that the

success of any policy heavily relies on its
design.

The design of auctions, as we mentioned, is
not only to have a low price at the end, but

it can be designed to satisfy other objectives
such as socio-economic development and also

most recently system integration, and this
is where I pass the floor to Paolo to talk

about system integration and policies in the
heating sector.

Thank you.

[Applause].

PAOLO FRANKL: So this graph actually means
entering in a new era, with solar PV and wind

below five cents, these trends will continue
in many countries, the prices announced below

three cents, some also two cents.

This is really changing the narrative and
system integration is becoming a priority

in many countries.

So, a lot of this discussion is reserved on
that, and there is still a lot of confusion,

because many countries think that this is
a problem starting from the onset.

This is absolutely not true.

It is helpful to look at different phases,
and the phases are according to two parameters.

One is the share of penetration of renewables,
wind and sore similar in the mix, and the

second is the flexibility of the rest of the
system.

We distinguish four starting phases.

The first is no impact at all.

Why?

Because the variability, the flexibility of
the system copes with variability of demand,

which is much, much higher than the availability
of wind and solar, so absolutely no action

to be taken.

Second, you see a difference in the net load,
so in the remaining load curve, minus total

the total minus wind and solar, but still,
the flexibilities are abundant.

Typically, if you avoid typical mistakes,
below ten per cent of penetration, these are

the two most important phases in the whole
world.

I have only a few countries listed here.

I could add another 100-plus in phase one.

In should be remembered.

Then you have a number of countries which
are above ten per cent of penetration.

These typically are European countries but
also some US markets where the flexibility

becomes key, and I will come to flexibility
again in a minute, and then you have only

a very few countries with extremely high penetration
rates where also the short-term stability

of the system becomes an issue.

Ireland here is a special case, because it
is an island.

It is weakly interconnected to the United
Kingdom, so it faces those kind of problems

well before Denmark and Southern Australia.

Now, the typical question is how much is the
share of renewables that can integrate?

This really depends on flexibility.

Flexibility has many sources.

The first point, from the left to the right:
also renewables can serve more flexibly and

serve ancillary systems if we ask them to
do it.

If we apply the wrong standards, then there
is no way.

System-friendly renewables first.

Second, also, dispatchable generation, which
is by far the largest amount of flexibility

today.

There is a lot of flexibility in other renewables
like hydro-bioenergy, and gas, and even coal

and nuclear can be operated for flexibly.

Demand-shaping: demand-size response is the
cheapest way of flexibility and there are

no markets with a few exceptions in the world.

And then storage: there is a lot of discussion
of storage, rightly so, but for the moment,

this is the most expensive option.

I'm referring here to batteries.

The progress in batteries is phenomenal.

It will continue, driven by electric vehicles,
but bear in mind there are other delivery

options.

Grid is it is a huge resource in itself, but
it is also the enabler of the other flexibility

resources.

Now, however, it is not about hardware.

It is a lot also about software, and the system
operation and the market rules, and here I

want to be blunt: the market rules that we
have where there are energy markets, were

designed in another era for different proposals,
and they're not necessarily fit for a high

share of renewables in the system.

They have to be redesigned.

And, by doing this, we can have a very cost-effective,
very high share integration of renewables.

I would like to stress that the system integration
of variable renewables is not a technical

issue, it's by far a more economic optimisation
issue.

The last point is about the whole architecture
and the role and the responsibilities.

We speak a lot about distribution generation.

Who is responsible if there is a disruption
at distribution level?

Is it the TSO?

Are the suppliers?

We need a set of new rules, and one important
message of this report is that all this needs

to be done in an integrated holistic way.

Now, from a very advanced topic to what we
call the Cinderella of the renewable policies,

which is heat.

Heat, as you know - heating and cooling - as
you know, is 50 per cent of total final consumption,

but there are many less renewable policies
around the world, and there is much less expansion

of renewables in the world on this.

If you look, it is only nine per cent of modern
renewables supplying renewable heat.

Seven is direct use, and two per cent is renewable
electricity.

We have good examples of leaders inform the
world - the Nordic countries, also Brazil

- but there is a lot, lot to be done.

If you look at this map, which is very different
from the one that Diala showed, the most of

the map is grey, which means no policies at
all.

Then the other interventions are obligations,
and only a few countries, mainly Europe, are

using direct incentives for renewable heat.

We have to transform this and to make this
Cinderella into a Princess.

For doing this, we think it is useful to look
at four different situations, four policy

classes.

One, the countries that have a strong either
existing or potential district heating system

- this is the model of the Nordic countries
- but the next country that could step in

here to provide this strategic heating and
cooling with renewables instead of coal is

China.

The second is countries of that a heavy gas
system, like my country, Italy, or the UK.

The narrative here is completely different,
and the first priority is to create a level

playing field.

The third point regardless of the infrastructure,
countries where this is a potential market

for industrial applications.

Industry is not just high temperatures, steel
and cement-making, but it is also low and

medium temperature processes in the textile,
in the food industry, with a lot of possibilities

and, of course, for automatic water, and the
fourth, last but not least, it was mentioned

so much in the previous parts, clean cooking,
and making sure that we have affordable products

and this should be a policy priority for all
countries in the world, much more than it

was today, and, with this, I give the floor
to Rana.

Thank you.

[Applause].

Thank you.

So, after having first the - heard the first
energy sector, we're coming to the second

one, to transport.

Transport is basically the second largest
energy end-use sector.

It represents 29 of total final energy consumption.

When we are looking at how energy uses are
being used in this sector, we're at 3.1%.

It is really a sector that is highly fossil-fuel
dependent.

As a result of this, it is contributing to
a large extent to energy-related CO2 emissions.

And this really means that, for a full decarbonisation
of the transport sector and the energy sector,

there's a need to have renewable energy deployed
in the transport sector more than we currently

have.

As in other sectors, policies are key to do
this, and, when we are looking at the policy

activities which took place, we really see
that there is experience basically only in

the biofuels policies.

On the production, on the use and the distribution
of biofuels.

This is something which is very important
to do, but it is not enough.

It also means that, today, the approaches
to really lead to the uptake of energy in

the transport sector needs top much, much
broader.

They need to look at the road transportation
and aviation, and shipping, and they do not

only need to focus on biofuel solely, we see,
for instance, electrification.

What is needed here is integrated planning,
integrated policy design, and there is really

a need to look at the energy carriers and
the fuels on one side, but also policy that

focuses on the development and the use and
deployment of the vehicles, which can use

these renewable fuels, and also the distribution
also of these fuels.

Another aspect which is really important is
we do have a sector highly dependent on fossil

fuels.

Here, it is very clear to have a better enabling
environment, I guess.

There is really a need to phase out or address
the fossil fuel subsidies.

Remove the fossil fuel subsidies.

Yesterday, there was a session on carbon pricing,
too.

Carbon pricing can be an essential element
to address this too.

When we are coming to - so we have heard basically
in all sectors that we are entering another

era, because the economic situation is a different
one, because there is really a need to have

a much broader integrated approach.

This is something which needs to be reflected
also in the positive classifications.

What do we see today?

Policies in the past were focusing very much
on direct policies, direct supporting policies.

Today, there is a need to have more integrated
policies focusing on the enabling environment,

the need to have integration with other sector
policies, and also to put the policy framework

into the broader sorry yes economic system.

I'm not going to - broader socioeconomic system.

You will have the opportunity to look at it
in the full report.

Now, what is the conclusion overall, I guess,
of this work, of the three organisations?

A part of the fact that this is the first
report where the three major organisations

working on renewable energy are working together,
and I do think this is really also something

important to mention, it means that we agree
on the fact that policies are key.

It also means that we agree on the fundamental
principle that we need to move the policy

development to a much broader approach, and
integrate energy policies and develop them

not in an isolated way but in a broader context.

This is already one method.

The other one is obviously that what we mentioned:
we're looking into the other sectors.

If we are serious about reaching the decarbonisation,
reaching sustainable development goals, we

cannot only have a focus on the power sector.

We need to address transport, we need to address
heating and cooling.

We heard about energy access, and we also
need to look into the regions where the renewable

uptake is lower than in regions where we really
see huge success of renewable energy.

It is very clear that there is not one sole
instrument policy which can be and lead to

the success everywhere.

So, policy design and policies need to be
country-specific, and need to take into account

the socio-economic context of the particularities.

Again, I'm highlighting this again, but there
is a need to break out of our energy silo,

and to speak with players out of other sectors.

This might not always be so easy because it
means we have different mandates, it means

we have different understanding.

We need to bridge and create a dialogue, but
this is fundamental if we are serious about

renewable energy uptake and transition.

Thank you very much.


