Excellencies, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen,
a warm welcome to you all.

I just talk German. Please, put your headsets on.

>> English subtitles start at 2:20 >>

In Paris, the international community made a clear commitment to attaining

a greenhouse gas-neutral approach to commerce and life before the end of the century.

And we need the success of the global energy
transition, which is already happening, and

which has already made a lot of contributions.

So let me mention a few points which I think
are of importance in this context.

Firstly, coherence.

We have known for years that there is a massive
gap between the international climate target,

or rather the path towards them, and the current
greenhouse emission trends.

We know that roughly two thirds of global
emissions come from the energy sector, and

the national contributions, the nationally
determined contributions - NDCs - won't be

enough, and, therefore, the idea is that the
NDCs should be regularly reviewed and tightened

if necessary.

Now, this will happen for the first time by
2020, and it will be vital to dovetail climate

policy and energy policy better in order to
formulate new national targets.

If we are to do that, we need a reality check
which looks at the actual market relevance,

and the potential in the energy sector.

We believe there's a great potential here
which we can leverage,and I don't need to

tell you that the energy sector has developed
so dynamically in recent years that the assumptions

made in 2014, of which the first round of
NDCs was based, is quite clearly less than

our current expectations.

Just think of the cost reductions in renewables.

Just think of the innovations in electric
mobility and electricity storage.

Think of the potential for energy efficiency,
but also the uncertainties about fossil fuels

such as, for example, the development in oil
prices.

Following coherence, a second key point is
reliability.

This is true of policymakers, and of genuinely
long-term signals.

We need the confidence of all stakeholders
in this from citizens to investors.

Unfortunately, even Germany has a gap between
its 2020 climate targets - 2020 targets which

we haven't been able to close yet despite
all our efforts.

The reason for that is not a lack of action
in the last years, but rather, a lack of action

in the previous decades.

As you all know, it takes time to change direction.

I think my task is to work as hard as I can
to close this gap as far as possible, and

to look not just to 2020 but also to 2030,
and 2050.

And here, the climate action plan, which we
adopted in the federal government, in 2016,

and the core objective of this is that, by
2050, as far as possible, no more greenhouse

gaffes should be emitted.

The only exceptions would be a few unavoidable
emissions in agriculture and industry, and,

what that means basically for the energy sector
is zero emissions by 2050, and, we derive

from that an interim goal of at least 55 per
cent by 2030.

We have broken down this target between the
various sectors, and stipulated how much is

still to be emitted in those target by 2030.

These goals show us what task we have ahead
of us.

We now need both things: short-term measures
and long-term decisions for the future.

For example, we need to invest in low-emission
industrial process, and we need to invest

more in non-fossil propulsion.

Also, we need to take and retain, keep attention
focused on our climate targets when we take

investment decisions which will determine
the next few decades, such as new power plants,

electricity grids, and we want to avoid lock-in
effects.

As we phase out fossil fuels, renewables are
of key importance.

Renewable electricity covers a third of our
total electricity demands, and has penetrated

the market, we need to focus more on the other
sectors.

We need to make sure that renewable energy,
and particularly renewable electricity, becomes

an important source of energy in other sectors.

One part of this is more efficient energy
use where we are still far from reaching our

goal.

We decided to adopt a programme of measures
in the federal government, and to adopt a

climate action law in the course of the next
few years.

This law will not only help us to reach our
climate targets but also provide companies

in Germany with investment security, including
companies in the energy sector.

That leads me to my third point:: climate-friendly
investment.

US$90 trillion needs to be addressed in renewal
and expansion of infrastructure which would

have had to be undertaken in any case.

By infrastructure, I mainly mean the energy
transport and building sector.

I believe we have a great opportunity to invest
this money in a climate-friendly and a climate-resilient

way.

If we manage to guide this finance into sustainability
developments, then I think we will be implementing

the Paris Agreement in a very important aspect.

The trend is already clear: more and more
investors, private and public sector are decarbonising

their investments.

A lot of insurance funds are now on board
as well.

This really is transforming the financing
of the global energy transition.

And, who, especially the naysayers would have
thought that was possible a few years ago.

For many companies, protecting the climate
is an element of their corporate strategy,

and not just because top management echelons
suddenly have become environmental activists,

but rather these are rational, economic decisions
and the fact is that combating climate change

has become a driving force for innovation
and jobs.

My fourth point refers to responsibility giants
- in other words, how the - responsible guidance

- in other words it's a massive modernisation
programme.

If we do it smartly, this will lead to further
growth in the economy and jobs.

And we will certainly be boosted in this by
the stimulus from international climate policy,

but the road to a low-carbon economy is not
easy for Germany, either, and therefore, we

are setting up a commission for growth, instrumental
change, and jobs, and this is tasked, and

has an historic task.

It has got to work at the end of the years
and come up in a final phase -out date for

coal in Germany.

But of course, a date in itself is not enough.

We now need to talk to the people and regions
who are affected about this by their future

prospects.

The real challenge is to find a path forward
which means phasing out coal will make the

coal-based regions into an economic success
story.

I can understand very well that people are
made uncertain by such upheaval.

I come from Westphalia, a coal-mining state.

I know what structural change means.

I know that changes which affect large parts
of the population can only be undertaken together

with the people affected.

We need to open up ways to new technologies
and structures which take account of the burden,

the - that the environment can cope with,
whether it is in the city or in the country.

The advantages, the benefits need to reach
all people, and protecting the climate must

not be a programme for the elite.

I therefore believe that the future lies in
the co-operative climate and energy policy

in which people participate, and this is not
only true of national level but also of international

level.

It is quite clear that Germany and the EU
are committed to the Paris Agreement, and

to our climate targets.

We will demonstrate that through specific
measures for the time of 2020 and 2030.

This also means that we are committed to the
joint commitment by the industrial countries

to mobilise an annual US$100 billion from
2020.

In this context, we will be doubling our international
climate financing from public funding by 2020,

and we will continue to support our partner
countries in the global south.

In this context, let me also mention the international
climate action initiative of my ministry which

has provided a support for a lot of projects
to promote low greenhouse gas and innovative

energy policy.

At the beginning of May, we will be celebrating
ten years in which we've done an awful lot,

an amazing lot, to combat global climate change.

Ladies and gentlemen, I think we can learn
a lot for each other, both in terms of technological,

and also in terms of societal solutions.

We are working towards that in UN bodies,
and also, at events like this one.

So, let us be bold together.

Let us be bold to take advantage of the opportunities
which lie in the radical transformation.

On this note, I wish us all a very fruitful
dialogue, and thank you for your attention.


