Good morning to you all.

My colleague, Heiko Maas, Vice-President Sefcovic, Commissioner, ministers from more than 30countries,

Excellencies, Mr Amin, Dr Fatih Birol.

Welcome on behalf of Chancellor Angela Merkel to all of you.

She has been a Minister of the Environment.

She was involved in the negotiation of the
Kyoto Protocol.

She is a whole-hearted support of your activities
back at home in your countries and your regions

because she is deeply convinced that only
when we can manage to establish a more sustainable

world will we make progress with regard to
stability, peace, freedom, and democracy.

This morning, during breakfast, I was thinking
what do we have in common, the ministers,

the foreign ministers, and the ministers of
energy?

The answer is quite clear: we are struggling
like hell to avoid black-out, to avoid political

black-out on a day-to-day basis, to avoid
electricity blackouts in our countries and

our regions.

We have a second thing in common, and this
is that all of us know the short-term work

as fireworkers worldwide to avoid blackout
will be successful only if we are able to

decide on long-term developments, and if we
decide now on what has to be implemented and

achieved 20 years from now.

Ladies and gentlemen, we are facing great
challenges as the Foreign Minister already

said.

We should not give into illusions.

In the next couple of years, we will only
be able to achieve the energy transition if

we understand that this is a long-term project.

An energy transition is like operating on
an open-heart surgery.

You cannot achieve it overnight.

You need to start 20 years ahead, 30 years
ahead.

You need to master great challenges.

Ladies and gentlemen, in Germany, in the 1990s,
this is when we started to install the first

renewables installations.

Back then, investors were seen as idealists,
as crazy people.

They said, "Oh, it is a nice hobby, but it
can never cover the industrial needs of a

country of 80 million people."

Now it's 30 years later and we are producing
36 per cent of our electricity from renewable

sources.

In January of this year, on 1 January this
year, 2018, we've been able to for a short

amount of time to cover all of our energy
demand in Germany from renewable energy installations.

This is the progress that we are seeing that
was achieved.

Around 20 years ago, there was a big boom
in expanding renewable energy, because maybe

we had the most expansive funding system around
the world, but it was also very loftily, so,

ten years later, in 2012/2013, the energy
transition was in troubled waters with people

saying we simply cannot afford this energy
transition.

Today, it is six years later again, and we
can say that ex-pangs of renewable energy

has become a lot more affordable and we are
probably coming to a point where renewable

energy doesn't need any funding.

It is still profitable and competitive.

Yes, the solar panels, biogas, wind turbines,
all of these technologies will become more

competitive than energy from fossil fuels.

So, colleagues and friends, if you want to
do the same in your countries, if you want

to have an energy transition, you need to
start today if you want to see the results

in 20 years.

You need to make the decisions now, and, if
you're a Foreign Minister or Energy Minister,

it is a difficult task because you need to
convince your colleagues.

You need to speak to heads of state, parliaments,
parties, to other ministers, economic ministers,

and to other ministers as well.

So how can you convince them?

It's easy.

In Germany, like many of the island states,
and many northern and southern countries,

we are affected by climate change.

This is why we call it climate change.

There are also countries that are not close
to the coast.

They want to become emerging countries, industrialised
countries, and we are responsible saying we

understand it, we want prosperity and growth.

Our answer to this needs to be yes, we need
an energy transition because we want to have

prosperity for eight billion people around
the world.

After the end of the Cold War and the fall
of the Iron Curtain, the market economy became

really successful around the world.

Except two or three countries today, the laws
of the market economy have been enforced,

and it works.

The global economy is growing.

At the same time, there is a risk that industrial
developments and economic growth will be stifled

because of the environmental burden.

Everywhere around the world, and in our countries.

This was the situation in the 1970s when,
in Germany, we started to clean up our rivers

and to make sure that our skies became blue
again.

So the most important I think in favour favour
of energy transition is that it brings prosperity

around the world and it helps us create economic
growth for many decades to come, and that

is also an opportunity for us to create more
energy by polluting the environment a lot

less.

This is the great challenge we are facing.

The second point that you can take back to
your presidents and Prime Ministers is that,

if you are fast, one of the first movers,
you can also do a good business with the energy

transition, the energy transition becoming
a business case.

Just like the innovation cycles, it will bring
benefits to those who move first, and this

is why yesterday, I talking to Fatih Birol
and Adnan Amin, and many others, and we talked

about what we can do to move the energy transition
forward in Africa, in Latin America, and I

had a long talk with my good friend, the Turkish
Energy Minister, because Turkey is an enormous

economic hub, it is a long way from Germany,
but we have many things in common, and we

saw that, for many similar reasons, we need
the energy transition in our countries.

We need to work together.

How can it be that the production of solar
energy in many Asian, or Asian countries,

where the sun shines a lot more intensively
than in Germany, is still more expensive than

in our country?

How can it be that wind turbines are not built
where there is the most wind?

Because it's too expensive to build them or
maintain them.

This is why we need forums like this one.

We need to get our experts talking, our investors
talking.

We need big projects, not only as part of
the development co-operation, we need big

economic projects that are profitable at the
end of the day, and that help whole countries

to lead in this new economic times.

This is why we also need to discuss the mistakes
of the past, and how we can prevent them in

the future.

Germany was one of the first countries - not
the very first one - but was one of the first

countries that was ready to take a risk, and
to move forward.

Like many other countries, we gained a lot
of experience, and we would like to share

our experience with you.

We would like to discuss this experience.

Germany is a country that wants to learn too
because we've understood that the energy transition

only works globally.

It can only - it is only viable if it is not
just a solution for one or two countries but

a solution for the whole world, and if there
is prosperity, competitiveness, and ecological

sustainability.

If these three things are combined.

This is what we seek to do.

In Germany over the last couple of years,
we've seen that the energy transition is not

only brought about by energy ministers or
environment ministers, but that it is society

that needs to bring it about.

I would like to share with you, that, when
appointed environment minister a few years

ago, nobody in Germany really knew when the
energy transition was.

Then I gave a few scandalous, interviews,
and there was a lot of criticism about this.

I learned a lot.

Suddenly, the interior minister, the defence
ministers, suddenly started to become interested

in how we can make the energy transition a
success.

Now we have a government from the Foreign
Minister to the education minister, to the

health minister, we have 16 ministers, and
all of them are experts in the energy transition.

They know how important it is not only to
build biomass systems and solar systems, but

we also need to expand the grid.

In the last 100 years, electricity was produced
and generated where it was used - in the big

cities and in the industrial hubs.

The energy transition leads to a shift in
this.

Rural areas are suddenly benefitting from
economic growth because wind turbines and

solar panels, the biomass installations are
not built in the cities but in rural areas

where there is a lot of space, and where it
is cheap to buy land, and where you can generate

electricity and produce energy without annoying
people who live there.

This is why we need to restructure our grids,
and this is difficult for a developed country

such as Germany but it is good, if countries
that are just starting to modernise their

state grids who are just thinking about how
in a digitised world, build up an energy supply

to make sure that we have a reliable energy
supply, so, if you anticipate what's necessary

in the future if you expand renewable energy
for the next 20 or 30 years.

I'm grateful that the energy agency is willing
and ready to install an energy-efficiency

hub, because we're not only talking about
expanding renewables, we're talking about

the issue how can we use the energy that we
have more efficiently?

It's not a secret that there are low-hanging
fruits.

There are many countries where, if you build
good energy infrastructure, you could certainly

save 40 per cent of the energy that is used
there today.

Can you imagine that 40 per cent more energy
that's available for your economy, for your

population, for greater prosperity, and for
industrial production, we need to talk about

how we can store energy.

Today, I saw on Twitter that Elon Musk who
has made a big contribution in the US in renewable

energy, especially solar energy, are becoming
competitive.

He said we can store energy today at a cost
that was unimaginable a few years back - battery

storage units, for example.

We don't know whether they will be a solution
in the future for both of the problems we

are facing today, but they will be a solution
for many countries, and in certain sectors,

so we need to this about how we can help energy
storage units become cheaper, so it's not

only about distributed subsidies, it is also
about making a market economy and competitiveness

possible in this sector.

Yesterday, also talked with Vice-President
Sefcovic, and we talked about Europe, and

weeds that ten or 15 giga- factories to cover
the global need of battery storage units.

In Europe, and beyond many other countries.

In Japan, in Korea, in the US, there are many
giga- factories that are emerging, but this

process that will lead to not all of these
factories surviving and maybe some will not

be profitable at the end, but this is what
it is like in a market economy.

This is a necessary process, because, at the
end of the day, we will then have batteries

that maybe 50 per cent, 30 per cent, 20 per
cent of the price that we have today.

And then they will be competitive, not only
in developing and emerging countries, but

also in emerging and developing countries.

Those are the challenges we are facing, whether
it is in Germany and in France, the UK, Turkey,

or in Greece.

We haven't mastered these challenges anywhere
around the world.

We are still in the first phase.

We know it is possible not only in theory
but in practice, and we know it is worthwhile

working toward achieving this goal, and we
can spread prosperity around the world if

we can help promote sustainability and environmental
protection all around the world if people

think about how they can spread more prosperity
and not more war and conflict, we can make

contribution to more peace and reliability
around the world.

This is a key condition for millions of people
to live their lives, all people around the

world are free and equal, that is also enshrined
in the constitution of the United States,

and also in the French constitution.

They are born the same, but in the last couple
of hundred years, not all of the people had

the same opportunities to live free and equally,
and, if we move forward at the energy transition,

we will provide more people with the opportunity
to do this not in the next few years, but

it is worthwhile to work towards this goal.

Thank you for coming, and I wish you successful
talks and discussions, and a lot of success

at home in your countries for driving forward
the energy transition in your country.

Thank you very much.

[Applause].

I don't want to let you go without asking
you a question as well, but you need a mic

for that.

Please could you go back to the desk straightaway.

Thank you.

So, a question about an issue that a lot of
people here in this room are interested in,

the Federal Government, the German Government,
has decided to set up a commission to talk

about the phasing out of coal-fired power.

Many people say that means we just push it
to one side, kicked the can down the road.

My question to you minister is how do you
want to make sure, by the end of this year,

the Commission will come up with the outcome
we need?

Fossil energy production is one of the most
important issues.

We have decided in the G20 summit that took
place two years ago in Germany, we have in

the G7 summit, we have decided to phase out
nuclear energy consumption until the end of

the century.

Every country, every single country, needs
its own road map for achieving that.

In Germany, we are facing a double challenge,
because we have decided to implement energy

transition.

That was a good decision.

We have taken another decision that is widely
accepted as well, and this is the phasing

out of nuclear energy production.

We will close down the last nuclear power
plant in Germany by 2022/2023.

It is established by law so everybody knows
it and everybody prepares for it.

It makes it quite difficult to compete with
countries that are the front-runners in phasing

out fossil and coal energy supply as well.

Nevertheless, we believe it is important,
and we have decided a climate-protection plan

for Germany.

It was decided in a cabinet meeting last year,
two years ago, and we have established in

order to meet the Paris Agreement climate
goals, and the 2050 climate goals, we have

sent goals and aims for 2030 which means we
will have to reduce CO2 emissions from coal-power

plants by 60 per cent until 2030.

That has concrete consequences, that we have
to decide which power plants will be cut off,

and which ones will produce a little bit longer.

We will cut down our fossil, coal, and electricity
production by half until 2030.

This is something that has to be accepted
by political parties, by state governments,

and therefore, we have established in our
coalition agreement such a committee.

Germany is very well known for its committees.

We have more committees perhaps than companies,
but, when you look at our experience in almost

over 70 years, most of them have been successful,
because it is a way to shape and to achieve

compromise.

Compromise that will last even after government
change, and therefore, and therefore, the

idea is to have a clear vision.

What has to be done until 2030.

Then we can anticipate the phasing-out, and
we can start creating new jobs - jobs that

are reliable for people, for a mid-term and
long-term future in the areas where the power

plants will be cut off.

Part of the power plants is located in Eastern
Germany, where we have instrumental disadvantaged

regions, and therefore, I will attend later
this morning a cabinet meeting of the Saxonian

government in order to discuss how we can
achieve it.

I see my most important priorities as an Energy
Minister - I'm a Minister of the Economy as

well - but as an Energy Minister, one is extending
our grit in a way that all the renewable energies

and electricities can be transported and used,
and, second, achieving a compromise that will

end the polarising debate about fossil energies,
because everybody will know we are fazing

out, not - phasing out, not within two or
three years, it will take a lot longer.

There is a clear signal that Germany is part
of the transition from fossil energies to

renewable energies.

Thank you.

Thank you, very much.


