Your Excellencies, distinguished Ministers,
ladies and gentlemen, it truly is a great

pleasure to be here.

This is the fourth Berlin Energy Transition
Dialogue.

I have been to all four of them.

As head of IRENA, it is absolutely appropriate,
because the idea of IRENA itself was born

here in Germany.

The Energiewende is part of our DNA, and we
are always pleased every year to engage in

this extraordinary discussion that happens
here with this multiplicity of stake holders.

For us, Germany's leadership has been instrumental
also in developing a vibrant international

framework to promote rue uncomfortable energy
with IRENA at its heart, and I look forward

to working closely with you and the 180 countries
we are actively engaged in as we go to the

next level of the global energy transition.

I would also like to express my appreciation
for the two speeches made by Minister Maas

and Minister Altmaier.

I think that, as new ministers in this field,
their continued dedication to the Energiewende,

and to this dialogue, is truly impressive.

I've known Peter Altmaier for quite a while
now.

I think he's an absolutely appropriate appointment,
because the personal reservoirs of personal

energy he seems to possess are really quite
remarkable.

So, ladies and gentlemen, we are facing an
unprecedented period of global change which

is affecting all facets of our society at
an astonishing pace.

Established economic and trade systems are
under pressure, technology is disrupting existing

economic and social structures, and extreme
weather conditions and natural disasters are

a regular reminder of how climate change is
impacting our planet.

But similar forces are also reshaping the
energy sector.

In less than a decade, renewable energy has
moved from the sidelines to the centre stage

of the global energy landscape, largely thanks
to supportive policy frameworks and technological

innovation and rapidly decreasing costs.

In 2017 alone, our numbers show a record-breaking
167 gigawatts of renewable energy capacity

were added globally, making it the sixth consecutive
year in which additional power generation

capacity from renewables outpaced conventional
sources.

By 2020, we expect all currently available
mainstream renewable energy technologies to

be cost-competitive with fossil fuels in most
parts of the world.

Few would have envisioned such remarkable
progress only a few years ago, and we are

truly in the midst of a revolutionary change
in our global energy system.

Today, we are presenting our findings of the
new energy transformation road map 2050 report

which fleshes out how the potential of renewables
can be further harnessed to address some of

the most pressing, economic, and environmental
challenges.

Building on results presented last year, the
road map shows in greater detail how the decarbonisation

of the energy system to meet climate objectives
through renewables and energy efficiency is

both technically feasible and economically
attractive at the country and at the regional

level.

Consistent with our previous findings, renewable
energy, and energy efficiency, combined provide

the most cost-effective path way to achieve
90 per cent of emissions reduction required

to remain well below the two-degrees change
objectives of the Paris Agreement.

To obtain this, renewable energy needs to
increase to two thirds of total final energy

consumption by 2050.

And, for this to happen, renewables would
have to be scaled up, at least six times faster

than in recent years.

The share of electricity consumed in end-use
sectors would need to double from approximately

20 per cent in 2015 to 40 per cent in 2050.

By 2050, the share of renewables in all countries
should exceed 40 per cent, and, in many, 60

per cent.

With very few exceptions.

In parallel, energy efficiency has to be scaled
up to bring energy demand almost back to current

levels, and I'm sure my dear friend Fatih
will talk much more about that.

With the rapid progress we are seeing today,
we feel that this scenario is achievable if

we have the political will and informed decision-making
that has to support it.

However, the energy transition is no longer
about accelerating the deployment of renewable

technologies alone.

It is increasingly about how renewables can
fuel economic growth, create employment, and

prosperity at large in an age of economic
constraints.

In this regard, our 2050 road map includes
new in-depth examination of the new socio-economic

benefits of the energy transformation which
outlines in detail the economic case that

underpins that.

In terms of costs and benefits, the energy
transformation makes compelling economic sense.

The additional costs of comprehensive long-term
energy transition would amount, in our calculation,

to 1.7 trillion US dollars in 2050.

Gains in human health and lower CO2 emissions
would reduce it by 2050 by an amount which

is three times larger than the additional
cost of carbonisation.

Let's think about that equation a little bit.

In addition, the energy transformation stimulates
new additional economic activity.

Across the world, GDP can grow to be almost
one per cent higher than the business-as-usual

case in 2050.

The - the cumulative gain will amount to 52
trillion US dollars from now until 2050.

Renewable energy jobs would reach nearly 29
million in 2050.

Importantly, the benefits of transformation
go well beyond GDP and include social and

environmental benefits such as health benefits
from reduced air pollution and reduced climate

impacts.

Our findings report a 15 per cent improvement
overall in 2050 compared to the current trajectory.

At the regional level, it depends on regional
ambition and socio-economic structures.

Despite fluctuations in GDP and employment,
welfare will improve significantly in all

regions.

While there will be fewer jobs in the fossil
fuel industry, holistic policies can create

many more employment opportunities in renewable
energy efficiency resulting in a net gain

of 11 million jobs in the energy sector, and
we are seeing this in both developed and developing

economies.

It is crucial that we take a proactive broad,
and inclusive approach to harness the benefits

of the energy transformation and consider
it against the backdrop of specific socio-economic

contexts in which it is taking place.

As the energy transformation moves forward,
we need to ensure that it just and fair across

countries, regions, sectors, and communities.

Ladies and gentlemen, we are already witnessing
strong evidence across IRENA's global membership

that the momentum of the energy transformation
is strengthening.

Renewable energies are penetrating power systems
to unprecedented levels.

Earlier this year, Germany briefly covered
around 100 per cent of its electricity use

with renewables.

Last year, the United Kingdom, the home of
the industrial revolution based on coal, went

a full day without coal, and more of its electricity
was produced by wind and solar than by nuclear

power.

In 2017, China added 53 gigawatts of new solar
capacity, doubling its existing capacity.

Power systems about higher shares of renewables
are no longer a hypothetical future but a

growing and tangible reality, and we see it
in the countries that many of you are representing.

Even the world's largest oil-producing countries
are taking bold steps to scale up renewables.

Saudi Arabia and Japan Soft Bank just signed
an agreement for 200 gigawatts solar power

by 2030.

200 gigawatts solar power in Saudi Arabia,
an ail-producing country by 2030.

These trends have become commonplace in our
host cubs, the United Arab Emirates, for instance.

Last September, Dubai awarded a bid to build
the world's largest concentrated power plant

with storage as part of the country's strategy
to generate 44 per cent of its power from

renewable energy by 2050.

The plant will be delivering energy at an
impressive.3 US dollar cents per kilowatt

hour.

The importance of these developments cannot
be understated.

Even those countries whose economies have
been largely dependent on oil see a key role

for renewables and the energy transition in
the future.

And finally, local governments, cities, and
major corporations around the world are increasingly

relying on renewables to meet their energy
needs, and to power their businesses.

California, for instance, which could by itself
be the sixth largest economy in the world,

recently announced that it would meet its
2030 power generation target of 50 per cent,

ten years ahead of schedule.

And a few weeks weeks ago, news came of the
single largest corporate purchase of so you

similar power in the United States by Microsoft
which will be adding 315 megawatts of electricity

as part of its 100 per cent renewable strategy.

Apple just announced that its global facilities
are now powered with 100 per cent renewable

energy.

While Google is on track to purchase enough
renewable energy to match the electricity

that is consumed over the next year.

These are truly path-breaking trends that
we are seeing.

So the energy system that is emerging is not
only more decarbonised but more digitalised

and decentralised.

Big data and block-chain technologies are
revolutionising it.

Sector coupling is gaining greater ground.

Off-grid renewable energy solutions like what
was talked about earlier, are tackling energy

access, and we estimate there are 146 million
worldwide now using some form of off-grid

renewable electricity.

We are no longer just transitioning from energy
source to the other, but are confronted with

a need to fundamentally rethink the design
of energy systems, and the socio-economic

structures that underpin them.

We are moving from a transition to a transformation
that is not just about energy, but about a

long-term economic industrial and societal
transformation that is key for the future

employment of people and prosperity at large
in the world.

And, most importantly, for a climate-safe
world.

But we believe that more action is needed
to accelerate this momentum momentum we must

accelerate progress - we must accelerate in
acceleration of decarbonising, modernising

our grid infrastructure - and I'm very pleased
to here that Peter Altmaier has given so much

prominence to this issue - and unlocking the
private and financial sector with new enabling

tools.

While the technology and economic aspects
of the energy transition have often been examined,

there is one issue that has not received of
attention.

How an energy transformation based on renewables
impacts relations between countries.

By enhancing energy security, independence,
and access, renewables have the potential

to move us away from the geopolitical dynamics
of scarcity and conflict that characterise

the energy system of the past to one seeking
to foster greater development, peace, and

international co-operation.

Last January at our assembly, we launched
the geopolitics of energy transformation to

better understand these dynamics and how they
could unfold in the coming years.

This Commission imposed of eminent government
and business leaders will hold its first meeting

alongside this session of the Berlin Energy
Transition Dialogue which has the distinctive

feature of bringing together both energy and
foreign policy communities, and I would like

to express my appreciation to Germany, the
United Arab Emirates and Norway for their

support in this initiative.

To conclude, let me thank the organisers for
putting together once more an engaging agenda

which captures the most important trends,
and challenges, facing the global energy transformation.

My own regret is there are so many parallel
ones, I can't attend all of them.

It is impressive to see this forum grow in
relevance, diversity, and level of engagement

each year in terms of knowledge-sharing and
exchange of experiences.

At IRENA, as we want to work with you all
present here, to move this transformation

forward and to day chief a climate-safe, resilient,
and stable energy future.

I wish you very fruitful deliberations in
the days ahead.

Thank you very much.


