And, again, we're doing a low protocol panel
here, so I'm going to introduce everyone in

alphabetical order, and then we will go cross
the panel in speaking order.

It is my pleasure to welcome first of all
Anton Anton.

He is Romania's Minister of Energy.

It's great to have you with us.

We have as well Leif Jakobsson from Sweden.

He is the State Secretary to the Minimum for
Finance sitting here.

Welcome to you also, sir.

And there in the middle is Michal Kurtyka.

He is Vice Minister of energy from Poland
- a very warm welcome and great that you could

join us.

Next to me is secretary of state to the French
minister for the ecological inclusive transition.

We also Mr Manuel González Sanz, the Minister
of Foreign affairs for Costa Rica.

Those are our policymakers, and then it is
my great pleasure to welcome Nicolette Bartlett,

Director of Climate Change, CDP - formerly
known as the Carbon Disclosure Project, works

with investors with the purpose of motivating
companies to disclose and manage their environmental

impacts, so, again, that transparency element
that Professor Edenhofer was just talking

about.

I'm going to ask the policymakers to get us
starting by talking about your respective

countries' approaches.

I have a question for each of you.

I would be grateful if we could keep the answers
fairly concise, meaning around three minutes,

so that that we get a maximum of interaction
going on our panel.

Madam Poisson, France has been pushing fork
a carbon price floor in the electricity sector

in Europe, and urging Franco German leadership
on this issue.

I would like to hear a bit more, if you would,
what exactly you're advocating here, and how

this would work together with Europe's ETS
system which of course has just been reconfigured.

Please?

Basically, I mean, the rationale behind the
policy we're trying to push under President

Macron's leadership which is promoting a carbon
floor price, especially focusing on Franco-German

co-operation on the issue.

The rationale behind this policy is basically,
it's not a surprise.

We're not on track to meet the Paris Agreement
commitments, right?

The planet is heating too fast, and we need
to do a lot - a lot more if we are to achieve

this.

So the ETS system at the European level is
good.

I mean, it's a good idea, but we think it's
not efficient enough and has been very smartly

described before, and so we would like to
go one step further.

We know that the reform, which is currently
going on, is again good but not enough.

We are talking about an emergency here.

This is why we want really to promote the
idea of a carbon floor price in the electricity

market.

The idea is that when it comes to these - so
a lot of people are asking us why do you want

to create another layer of quotas or why another
trading system?

Do we really need a carbon floor price?

Isn't it competition with what is already
existing?

We think that, no, because if we are currently
following this track, well, coal is going

clearly as we are now, coal is clearly going
to remain the most competitive fossil-fuel

power generation source in the coming years.

We want to do more to decarbonise the EU economy,
because, as I said, it is a matter of going

fast, so one of the - we know that beyond
Germany, with which we have interesting discussions

on this topic, we know that there is a range
of countries that are already - that might

be willing to actually join sort of a coalition
of countries that are willing to go one step

further.

So we've been having discussions with the
United Kingdom, some of the Benelux countries,

the Netherlands, and others.

We know that some countries are already committing
to basically phasing out coal completely.

I know some of the Benelux countries.

I know it is the case for Portugal.

Austria, Denmark, Italy.

So we think that we are sort of at a turning
point where we could build a coalition for

carbon floor price, because instead of an
uncoordinated set of nag policies and approaches,

we could obviously be stronger if we just
get together.

Even ideally, I know I'm speaking too much,
but ideally, what we would like to do is have

it obviously at the EU level with 28 countries,
if not more, just like the ETS system.

Although it might be difficult, we calculated
that it might allow us basically to save or

reduce our CO2 emissions by 100 million tons
a year.

This is the ultimate objective we have in
mind.

A lot of people also say - and I'm sure that
is going we are going to discuss later - the

carbon floor price in the electricity centre,
it's a good idea but it's going to cost a

lot of money, we're not ready to actually
phase out coal.

This is the discussions that we have with
a lot countries, and with Germany in particular.

But we believe that some of the revenues that
we can get from actually this carbon floor

price can be reinvested to support social
policies, for training, so I'm not going to

start now.

This is a fascinating topic.

I look forward to hearing more from all of
you.

Thank you very much.

How we channel revenues is at the heart of
the second round of questions I want to do

which is why I interrupted you.

I will move on to State Secretary Leif Jakobsson.

Sweden was an absolute pioneer on carbon pricing.

You introduced a CO2 tax 27 years ago pushing
the price of a tonne of carbon dioxide up

to EUR120 a tonne.

Please tell us about Sweden's experience and
how effective a carbon tax can be in driving

sustainable growth and what we conditions
have to be met in order to ensure political

acceptance.

Clearly, you managed quite a feat.

If you want to support the tax, you have to
vote on the Twitter.

There were four alternatives.

It is the most expensive ones is the Swedish
one.

Yes, it is really helped us - it has really
helped us.

I don't know if it it is possible to get the
picture on the screen.

If you will not remember anything else from
what I'm saying, so remember this picture.

It is coming on Twitter, too.

And what it is saying is that we, during 25
years, have increased our GDP with 75 per

cent, and, at the same time, lowered the emission,
the greenhouse gaffes emissions with - the

gene house gases emissions by 26 per cent.

We are all in Sweden think the same.

It's the carbon tax which has done this extraordinary
travel.

So, yes, it is really working.

Some advice from us first: it is very easy.

It is not rocket science.

We have it in our law in a way that we don't
measure emissions.

We have it on fuels, on weight, and on volume,
so it's very easy to administrate.

No problem with debt.

For Sweden, I have to say, it's also a part
of our business policy.

It means that we are challenging our companies
to be in the forefront when it has come to

climate, and it means that we are now developing
steel-making without emissions.

We have a paper mill which produces more energy
than is put in it, and also get 700,000 tonnes

of paper every year.

This is the pressure, the tax is the pressure
on our industry also.

And we use the revenues from the tax to support
R&D in industry to achieve better solutions.

And the advice is that don't start at our
level.

We start it on a very minor 25 years ago,
but when it is introduced, and it's a way

to go on.

And we think that we should - we could use
it even smarter now we are members of the

European Union.

We have an energy it is directive which was
made long before anyone thought about biofuel,

for example.

We have a hard struggle to use this carbon
tax in an innovative way.

We have to have a more modern approach from
the European Union to these questions, but

that's what we are struggling for, and we
hope that there will come some results out

of that.

We will come back to that with the revenues.

When you introduce it, you must also show
that you are doing things that make it easier

for people to accept it.

For example, been investments in public transport,
and that kind of thing.

DR CRANE: I will stop you there because I
do want to deal with that separate.

Don't forget the picture!

We won't.

The picture was very impressive.

Minister Sanz, your country has been doing
the carbon tax for quite a while, and obtain

98% of your power from renewable sources.

A significant achievement.

What are your plans for the future, and will
you keep the existing carbon tax or switch

to, for example, a carbon price, and, if so,
why?

>> I would rather have carbon tax, than call
carbon pricing than not having it.

We should feel ashamed as humanity of having
to have this kind of discussion.

We're killing our planet and ourselves, and
it's not a matter of paying something and

getting away with it.

Shame on us.

That's humanity.

[Applause].

Thank you.

As long as there is money out there - and
there is plenty of money - by paying a lot

of companies, and a lot of people, they're
going to get away.

It is unacceptable.

It is like killing a person.

If you have the chance to go to Yale or to
pay, what would people do?

They will pay.

They will find the money to pay.

They don't want to go to jail.

In general terms, I would say, as I said,
it is completely unacceptable.

But we have to come down to reality.

Of course, having carbon pricing is better
than not having in order to disencourage those

polluters from continuing to do so.

Yes, we are in the process of redesigning
what we did in the past to make it align with

the regulations with the post-Paris agreements.

We are still working on that.

We hope to finalise the new structure very
soon.

Nevertheless, I can't commit to a specific
date.

We are also pushing forward very hard to have
the Paris Agreement working in place as soon

as possible, so we can materialise, actually,
on the commitments we all assume.

We are a very ambitious country, and we aim
for other countries to be even more ambitious

than they have been so far.

We all know that the United States withdraws
from the Paris agreements, so we have to be

even more aggressive, and do more, and not
forget that, at the federal level, is where

they took the decision, but there are many
things that can be done at the state level,

and, at the city level.

We're very much willing to work with all other
countries in that direction.

I think it's very important - it seems very
theoretical but important as a principle - to

keep or to achieve higher levels of ambition
in regards to climate change.

I will leave it there.

I would like to come to Vice Minister Kurtyka,
and Poland's electricity sector has seen a

rise in renewable resources but remains strongly
reliant on coal, which means your country

has been very concerned about the distributional
impacts of carbon pricing.

So, what that you have heard here so far affects
you?

How would you say you would react to what
you've heard, also in terms of possibly adjusting

distributional impacts?

Does anything convince you that perhaps there
is more to this than might initially meet

the eye?

Thank you very much.

I think the discussion is extremely interesting.

For a country like Poland, we take our commitments
very seriously.

Since 20 years, we are decreasing our emissions
in a very substantial way, so, when we discuss

this subject, it is take into account every
voice.

And I think that, for a country like Poland
who, right now, has 6,000 megawatts of wind

- last Christmas, something like 40 per cent
of our energy provided from wind power - the

discussion is about what is the best way to
move forward in the energy transition that

would be, as you said, inclusive and not exclusive.

In this regard, we have to be fair, and we
have to take into account situations of different

countries, and, when we talk, for example,
with our Indian colleagues about the way in

which coal should be managed, they have the
right argument regarding energy poverty.

You're completely right about underlying this
distributional effect of this discussion.

As owe land will host climate summit this
year, at the end of the year, we feel somehow

responsible for taking this inclusive rather
than exclusive point of view.

I think that, in this regard, in the EU in
particular, we have done a lot of jobs.

We have spent hundreds of billions of euros
on renewables, on changing our energy systems,

but we must also face reality.

When emissions in the European Union decreased,
they decreased very much also due to the economic

slowdown.

Right now, we are faced with an increase of
emissions in European Union, and this is very

much a questioning whether yes or not we are
efficient in our way in dealing with this

subject.

We have developed extremely powerful but extremely
complicated tools like ETS.

We have spent months and months, if not years,
discussing about how this tool could be made

more effective.

We can see first results of this reform as
CO2 price in ETS in the European Union has

climbed by something like 70 per cent since
the last few months only, so we can see that

it has an effect.

But then we must also see whether how big
economies are behaving, and what are the drivers

of their decrease of emissions?

When we see, for example, the United States,
a country which is right now talking about

going out from the Paris Agreement, the decrease
of emissions has been very much due to technological

progress, and we must make everything possible
in order to marry economics, technological

process, and care for the planet.

I think we must do our best in order not to
over complicate, not to over administer, not

to put too much administrative hope in the
solution, but rather to think about what kind

of technological changes can be most efficient.

In Poland, we believe that a way to trigger
the potential of hundreds of billions of euros

invested in the European Union in renewables
lies very much in the storage of energy, but

there is a key to energy transition in the
European Union, and probably storage as such

is also one of the key elements of successful
climate policies.

In this regard, we have - we are doing our
utmost in order to promote electromobility.

The Polish government has subscribed to an
objective of one million electric vehicles

in order to develop the scale necessary that
we have enough storage capacities in the system

that can match already done investments in
renewables.

I think that it this is an answer that we
should have as the European Union, but this

is also an answer we should have as industries
- believing in new technologies, developing

them, and putting tell me at work for progress.

Thank you very much.

And I do want to come back to the distributional
side in our next round of discussions.

Minister Anton, coal plays a significant role
in Romania's energy mix, accounting for some

third of demand according to the statistics
that I found.

Your country would be one of those that would
be supported by the modernisation fund that

has now been established to be an adjunct
essentially to the European Union ETS.

Given that, what effect would a carbon price
have on the Romanian economy?

Are there still barriers in your view?

The positioning of the panellists, you know,
from the most supporting panellists for the

subject to the poorer countries, is that I
say.

I'm glad that my colleague from Poland has
taken some of the subjects from my speech!

First of all, I have to say that Romania is
strongly supporting the initiatives of keeping

the climate as it is.

Or strongly supporting the Paris Agreement.

And it fights for it.

Although it's not so easy.

We do have a mix of - I always said that the
energy mix is a good one for Romania.

For example, we have 57 per cent of the energy
produced which is carbon-free.

We have a lot of hydro power.

We have 23 per cent, for example, in the last
year, we have produced out of hydro12 per

cent out of wind, one per cent out of the
biomass, three per cent photovoltaic, and

three per cent nuclear.

So, that means that 25, the rest of 25 per
cent is coal.

We have to look from different points of view
at the carbon price and the things we are

discussing.

We need to look at the security of supply,
and I can give you a terrible example: This

winter, when we should - we were close to
a black-out, and we escaped only due to the

fact that all the coal powers have been pushed
in to produce energy.

It was a very short period.

It was a very cold, sudden cold, which affected
all the countries around us, not only Romania.

Of course.

We have to create market conditions for development
that new and reliable capacities based on

clean technologies, and that's what we are
fighting for and supporting very strongly.

But, in the same time, we have to solve some
social issues for the coal regions, because,

as you know, the coal regions are mono industrial
regions, and they're not - it is very complicated

to convert.

We have decreased dramatically the number
of miners but not to such an extent that they

do not have an important social role.

So, we have to develop the grade.

Our grid, when I was young, I was very proud
of our grid.

I was wrong.

It is not so performant, not so good, and
we do have to invest seriously in our grid,

and we do have to invest seriously in connection
with our neighbours.

Without our neighbours, we are discussing
things which are not realistic.

Storage is something we are far behind where
we should be.

We have had had discussions about hydro storage
plant of 1,000 megawatts, I don't know, since

20 years, and we didn't do it.

Why?

Don't ask me.

I don't know.

I'm an electronic engineer.

I would love to have it.

But I look at what is happening in Europe,
and I hope that we are going to do it, and

we are discussing about prosumers, which is
very important.

A lot of persons are willing to do it, and
I'm not going to tell you officially why we're

not doing it.

It's stupid!

Okay!

It's a thing that we can and will overcome.

I think - also, it is very important to ensure
the required coal capacity to maintain in

the system ready to operate for the security
reasons.

I'm not saying that we are going to invest
in new coal power plants, I'm saying that

we did invest in decreasing the emissions,
and we are going to fight also for the best

available technologies which are not cost
effective at all, and which can, in my opinion,

in our opinion, cannot be done in two years.

I think at the end of my speech that every
country has to have a certain pace depending

on the economic capacity and on the social
capacity of the countries.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

So those were our policymakers, and now I
would like to come to Nicolette Bartlett,

as and you to share your response to what
you've heard, and tell us what CDP can do

in order to help support change in countries
besides perhaps precisely those countries

that are worried about acceptance, that are
worried about distributional issues, that

are worried about security of supply?

Thank you, Melinda.

Starting with that distributional point, that's
a really interesting point.

The notion of the just transition that is
moving up the agenda, it's been in the policy

space as a discussion live and active for
some time, but I think what we are seeing

now is that it's moving up into the language
and the conversations of those investors who

are looking to change their investments.

I find that interesting, because the conversation
they're having really shows you the two sides

of the debate, because they're also very clear
to point out in certain countries - the investors

- that there's a year justice - a clear justice
issue.

So the very communities and the very people
we're looking to support through the transition,

through the just transition idea, are the
very communities that will be the most impacted

as well by climate change.

So there's kind of two sides to that debate.

We should not forget that when we talk there
is a reason why we are transitioning in the

first place, both from a managing-risk perspective,
but looking at it from the communities that

will be disproportionately impacted by the
impact of climate change.

I think that's really important as well when
we have that discussion.

I think the floor price has risen up the agenda.

Business in Europe used to be, I would say,
purist about the market and keeping that clean,

if you can put it that way.

But I'm starting to see a sea change in that
direction.

You see much of the financial sector, some
of the banks, have really noted how it has

driven a change in the United Kingdom in terms
of the energy transition, and, of course,

France is looking at that just from the power
sector.

I've sown many banks now talking about how
it's clear for them how they can manage and

price risks when they're looking at utilities.

It was a big shock in terms of the finance
sector in terms of what happens in Germany

and the German utilities.

It is safe to say that risk piece is not about
the explicit carbon markets, right?

You can only look to the German utilities
to see that.

They were not pricing all the risks that were
coming in, and carbon was being priced in

many ways in the German economy that wasn't
managed or foreseen very well.

It was a big shock to the financial markets,
so you've seen a lot of the banks and investors

look for clarity and seeking that, and they
found that, in the United Kingdom, floor price

has really driven a shift away from cold quite
dramatically.

It it means they can price those utilities
and new generation can pay companies quite

well in the right framing, and, I think that's
really important when you look at it from

a finance-sector preventive, you often see
a different view.

They're becoming more and more interested
in those - in the pricing of risks and the

metrics that one can use.

In CDP, our data, we've seen 1,400 companies
last year report to us that they use an internal

carbon price to measure and manage risk.

When a smaller group of those companies are
actually doing at quite a high level.

It has become something that the finance depart
and the CFO has become really interested in.

It takes that carbon emission language and
translates it into a metric.

It means you see innovation, a complete shift
in the way that the planet manages climate

risk and moves towards a zero carbon good
and services.

I think that very interesting to watch in
terms of it's changed.

I don't know how carbon pricing is being seen,
and, I think signally that you mentioned Professor

Edenhofer the cost of capital.

The cost of capital is the carbon price in
the economy would be an ideal way to send

a signal to investors, but there are also
other ways in which companies, the cost of

capital could and will be impacted in the
future, and, if you look at what is happening

with financial regulation, France is leading
the way on this, you will see banks starting

to have to price carbon themselves, and I
think central banks might step forward and

do interesting things in certain countries,
and that could change the cost of capital

and skew away from high-carbon investments
to low-carbon.

I think the carbon pricing as it is stood
by economics is changing as it hits the micro

economy, particularly the financial sector
and banking world.

Professor Edenhofer, likewise from you, perhaps
a response to what you've heard.

Which points to you want to pick up and how
do they fit in with the scheme that you showed

us in your presentation?

I think the most impressive slide we've seen
in this presentation is from our colleague

from Sweden.

This is what I mean when I talk about the
effectiveness of carbon pricing, the potential

of carbon prices to decouple economic growth
from the increase of emissions.

That's what what I'm looking for when I'm
talking about effective carbon pricing.

The worldwide scale, we're not on track.

We are basically seeing emissions rising and
again.

From my point of view, this is quite important.

As long as we're talking about long-term goals,
ambitious goals, without implementing reasonable

instruments, so, we cannot achieve anything.

That's the first thing.

The second thing what I would like to emphasise
is what you mentioned is on this implicit

carbon pricing and what banks are doing.

I think this is enormously important when
implicit carbon prices are used, because this

is a reasonable way how to deal with risks
in the financial sector - no doubt about this.

But, in the end, I would say that this emphasis
or thee efforts, can be be made even more

productive if we have the explicit carbon
price.

My third point is I would like to highlight
and also to emphasise what France has said,

because it's enormously important, and this
is the carbon price floor.

So, France and Germany, Germany and France,
the debate on the carbon price floor is a

little bit theoretical.

If we look at the proof that this can works,
we have to look at the UK.

This flexible support rate basically pushed
the transformation in the UK in an unprecedented

way, and that's from my point of view quite
important.

Here, I would like strongly to agree with
you - thank you very much - strongly agree

with you that the emissions trading scheme
is from a dynamic efficiency point of view

not working.

We've seen over the last few months moderate
increase of the carbon price I don't expect

that the further increase of the carbon price,
the impact of this reform will be quite limited,

and therefore a carbon licence for an is very,
very important, whereas the carbon price floor,

the European Commission can commit, it sends
a strong signal to the investors.

I think this is quite an important thing.

We have now the evidence on the table, and
I hope very much that France will be successful

to convince Germany and other countries in
Europe to follow that route.

Thank you very much.

Let me now come back to our issue of just
and fair transition, and talk a bit more about

revenues and how they might be used in countries
that do move adoption for carbon it is, to

deal with distributional impacts, and I'm
going to ask the three countries that are

directly to the left of me, that are working
with carbon taxes, to make the case, and then

I'm going to see if we can get a response
from Poland and Romania about how they see

it.

So, starting with you, Madame Poisson, do
you think that the way that revenues are channelled

can be used to remove some of the concerns
about injustice, and we've heard Mr Anton

countries at different levels of development,
and different levels of socio-economic challenges,

need to have different approaches to this.

Is there something we can do in the way we
channel revenues to meet those concerns?

Clearly, sitting from a politician's perspective,
justice is really the key issue.

If we don't solve this, and if we don't, beyond
solving it, because because we can find all

sorts of technical solutions.

What we needed is to identify and speak to
the people... what they want to do.

Using a carbon floor price and putting a price
on carbon is a great idea, but we need buy-in

from the population.

I still think we're really far from this.

So we need to design innovative and convincing
ways of using revenues from the carbon floor

price.

I strongly believe, and France strongly believes,
that we can actually - it is really an opportunity

in terms of revenues.

There's a lot we can gain and use, however
we have to commit, and make sure that we use

this revenue to reinvest it into social policies.

For example, been invest in training, the
attractiveness of the areas where a lot of

coal power plants were.

We should also, or we could use this money
as well to compensate the effect of an increase

of the price of electricity.

So I think clearly, this is an opportunity
if we design it well enough really to compensate

the effects of social injustice.

Frankly speaking, beyond that, it depends
on the economic model.

We can even use this revenue more generally
to fuel a host of social policies that can

help accelerate the energy and ecological
transition.

I think this is the key issue.

We should use most of our energy and political
capital, building solutions, and most importantly,

convincing people, and I think while I understand
really Poland's point of view, my dear friends,

we have had this discussion before.

I still think, and I really do think that
now that the opposition between economic development

and curbing CO2 emissions is obsolete.

I understand, and I'm not being arrogant or
anything, because I know how difficult it

is when most of your economics is based on
coal, but we want to do the same with nuclear

energy.

We are really serious about slowly facing
out - not facing out - not phasing out - using

55 to 65 per cent -
That will be big news!

That's not what I meant!

[Laughter].

Don't sell shares!

[Laughter].

I'm just, I just meant from 75 per cent of
our energy mix, that's where nuclear energy

is right now.

We want to bring it down to 50.

So, we are facing similar structural issues
that we can - that we have to overcome, basically.

Thank you very much.

She said that revenues can be channelled or
targeted.

As I understand it, Sweden doesn't do that.

The revenues flow into the general budget.

Would you say nonetheless that you have been
able to somehow get political acceptance,

and how have you delivered the kind of transparency
that Mr Edenhofer was talking about as a key

aspect of carbon it is.

Where is the money going?

We never ear-mark money.

As a politician, you talk about this as a
double win-win.

You put a price, a tax on the carbon, and
you can use the revenues for better technology,

or development, for public transport, for
building rail roads, for commuters - everything.

Of course, that's our - even if you can't
see it in the state budget.

Of course, we also used some ten or 12 years
ago, when we raised it, raised the carbon

tax once, we lowered the taxes for income.

There are different things that you're building
up muscles in the state to build the transition.

If the Polish and Romanian finance ministers
were sitting here, what would you tell them?

Go on, but in a very small scale.

Start it up.

Mr Sanz, Costa Rica does ear-mark the revenues
from the carbon tax.

Perhaps you can tell us where you see the
benefits in doing that, and how you would

argue for a carbon that did that does take
into account distributional impacts because

Costa Rica as well was not a wealthy country
when it put this into effect.

We have a good programme which has been successful,
and we call it "payment for environmental

services".

The funds are used mainly to pay land-owners
to preserve primary forest, and some reforestation

programmes as well.

It has been quite successful.

We should do that, continue to do that, and
use the resources in that line.

Also, we have to work, and this is the next
stage, we are working on it.

Programmes for mitigation and adaptation to
climate change.

So it's, the just a matter of preserving or
environmental issues, but also, for what is

coming in the near future.

If you allow me just to make a general statement.

In particular for developing countries, and
we are an example, and we are proud of it.

It is possible to have economic growth and
prosperity and at the same time preserving

the environment and fighting against climate
change.

It is possible.

It's not those two concepts doesn't exclude
each other.

Thank you very much.

So, let me ask Vice Minister Kurtyka and Minister
Anton to respond on this point especially

of socioeconomic impacts.

We've heard several arguments for the fact
that carbon taxes can generate income streams

that can be used for mitigation, that can
be used for socio-economic offsets for job

training, a number of different ways to advance
societal goals.

Leaving aside the security of supply arguments,
does any of what you've heard on the distributional

side convince you?

I can sense the phantom of my Minister of
Finance watching us!

[Laughter].

So, well, I'm deeply convinced that we can
marry ecological process and economic prosperity.

If I may say, my own example, I was raised
in Krakow, which is a beautiful city, but

which was a very intellectual, at one of the
oldest universities in central Europe, dating

from it was always a very intellectual city.

When the Communists took the country in 1945,
they decided to bring a big industrial complex

close to Krakow.

It was supposed to be part of the city, in
order to change this intellectual touch of

the city.

It didn't break the spirit of the city been
but it did worsen the air - it didn't break

the spirit of the city, but it did worsen
the air quality.

I was in the country in a place where we couldn't
open the window because it was so polluted

outside.

You don't need to convince us of the fact
that we can marry economic progress with taking

care of the planet, and of all of our lives.

And I think that, when some of you who will
join us in Katowice for the climate summit,

it is a vibrant, dynamic region, extremely
well developing, but still having this legacy

of air quality, and of different kinds of
pollutions behind it.

We must tackle this challenge.

Again, in this regard, we have different stakeholders.

I think, Minister of Finance, it's a lady
in Poland, if she was involved in this debate,

if she was encouraged, she would encourage
me, yes, please more revenues.

What are you waiting for!

That was an unfair question that you asked!

But then, of course, everybody has its point
of view, and we think it is easier for France

to talk about carbon-price floor than it is
to talk about nuclear phasing out, and vice

versa.

It might be easier for Poland to talk about
the nuclear price floor rather than talking

about the carbon price floor.

I think, and I think that we are the heart
of the debate.

We should be able to tackle these issues,
taking into account all possible aspects in

it, and I think that health aspects, that
poverty aspects are to be taken into account

if we want to be, as the European Union, responsibly
tackling this issue, otherwise, we will be

fooling ourselves in developing a system which
we believe would be very administrative, very

complicated, but, in fact, will not make the
right switch for the planet.

Minister Antic?

You know, I will start with an example - a
very simple one.

We have, I don't know, thermoelectrical power
plants based on carbon in one company.

This company can stand, and can live up to
seven tonnes price of the carbon prices certificates.

Now it's 14.

They came to me, and they said, "We're bankrupt
in the next six months."

How many people do work there?

Because it is a combination between the mines,
open mines, and the power plants, and, of

course, I'm not talking about the fact that
they are supplying 25 per cent, roughly 25

per cent of the Romanian energy, so, you asked
me whether does this have an effect?

Yes, it has a direct effect.

When I was talking about social impact, I
was not talking about only about the miners

losing their jobs, I was talking about relocating
industries, and closing industries, and the

Romania is not so happy and not so fortunate
to have alternatives, so, too many alternatives,

and to say, okay, no problem, I'm phasing
out all my carbon things, so it is more than

closing the mines and closing the power plants.

Okay, I 
have prepared some statements.

I'm not going to read them, because they're
not so important.

The thing which I want to add at the end of
my short intervention now is that Romania

is also at the edge of the European Union.

We have splendid very good relations with
our neighbours in terms of energy, energy

exchange, imports and exports of gas, and
not only.

And that's something we also have to take
into account.

Because, some changes in this region will
not affect the whole Europe but it will affect

Romania, and also Poland.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

I think that I would like to go to Professor
Edenhofer and then come back to you, Nicolette

Bartlett.

Professor Edenhofer, perhaps picking up now
on also the security piece, because, it was

mentioned by Mr Kurtyka and Mr Anton several
times, and it was also mentioned in the panel

before lunch, the need for better cross-border
linkage.

Also, Maros Sefcovic talking this morning
about the need to complete the energy union.

To what extent would better linkages between
cross-borders help make the introduction of

a carbon price easier?

First of all, a fully integrated electricity
market is an absolute prerequisite for effective

carbon pricing - there is no doubt about this.

I hope, in the end, we all of us can accept
an energy union, and we should not say if

some country is for a time a net importer
or a net importer of electricity, there's

something wrong with that.

From my point of view, this is absolutely
a prerequisite, because, in the end, it is

all about European trade.

I have a hard time to understand when some
people in Germany talking about if we come

- Germany would become a net importer, should
it be a big problem, and the other way around.

This is a prerequisite.

One aspect I would like to emphasise here,
is we are talking rightly about the distributional

concerns within a country, so how to use the
revenues, reducing other taxes, but, at the

same time, we have to think also very carefully
about the distributional concerns, and burden-sharing

within the European countries.

And, our colleagues from Poland says rightly,
so it is easier for Poland to talk about to

phase out of the nuclear power instead of
a carbon price.

This has to be taken into account again, carbon
pricing, and a carbon-price floor is a very

good thing, but, in the end, we have to make
sure that the burden-sharing among the European

countries is just and fair this that is absolutely
crucial.

Sorry, could I ask you a follow-up on that.

The reform of the ETS did put into place this
implementation fund and the modernisation

fund.

Does that not go far enough, in your view?

We're talking about the endowments with permits,
about the auction procedure which raises revenues,

and, in the end, any kind of carbon-price
floor needs all the additional transfers from

one country to another, otherwise, this cannot
be perceived as fair.

Saying we should have just one European prices
is a nice thing to do but this has to be complemented

with transfers.

It has to be on an international scale.

We have to talk at the same time about effectiveness,
about the reconciliation of growth, and emission

reduction, but, at the same time, it is a
fairness issue, a just and a fairness issue.

That's very, very crucial.

What I would like to emphasise here, this
can be done, and, by the way, we've done this

all the time at the European Emissions Trading
Scheme.

We always had a lot of debates about transfers
and burden-sharing, and there was nothing

wrong with that, and this will continue.

The only thing I would like to say shall we
should do this in the future, but an effective

carbon price floor can help us with the efficiency
of the integrated electricity market, but

if it is just and fair to help the different
countries to phase out the old stuff and to

phase in the new stuff.

I've got an eye on my watch, and I want to
make sure we get Janelle up here in just a

moment.

First, a question to you, Nicolette Bartlett.

It's about the role that local actors and
companies can play.

I know that CDP has been working with municipalities
in Romania.

Can you tell us a little bit about what their
role might be in driving adoption, for example,

of new policy mechanisms?

Thank you, Melinda.

We do, in fact, in Poland as well, cities,
states, regions, across all the countries

that work with us at CDP in terms of reporting
to us, and work with us how they can go about

not just mitigating but adapting to climate
change.

That's another link where this reuse, and
this revenue of recycling is interesting.

For city states and regions, particularly
that's where the rubber hits the road from

an adaptation perspective, and from some of
the critical sort of lifestyle changes that

will need to happen.

They will happen in a city.

So cities are sitting at the coal face of
climate change in many, many ways, and adaptation,

but they don't have access to international
funds for climate change.

They don't vest have access in an increase
in reactive from you from the national budget.

That is where this kind of can really ground
- so some cities have their own carbon-priced

systems and are using that revenue raise to
drive clean energy, make far resilient.

I think we need to see an increase in the
national and city level engagement on this.

, so that you can actually have, particularly
for adaptation, that Rev UI make a different.

I think in developing countries, and in Europe,
we don't talk about adaptation enough, and

we will be bitten if we don't, to be honest.

I noticed that with the European cities are
very far behind their developing country counterparts

in terms of really understanding how adaptation
will impact their citizens.

I was in Nairobi last week for the Africa
Carbon Forum, and it was fantastic to hear

them having this conversation on carbon pricing,
revenue-raising at how you pick up the money

for development.

Picking up that country theme is interesting
on this.

Chile's carbon tax is deliberately used to
fund education.

So, to increase in funding for education.

They've gone about something that is primary
development of the economy, and that's really

interesting.

It has driven up a lot of support for the
carbon tax.

What you see in the Americas right now is
really, really exciting, specifically the

Pacific Alliance.

I know that Costa Rica is looking to join
that conversation, and low-levelly, can join

that conversation in the coming years.

What is happening there - and we often forget
with carbon pricing systems is that they bring

in something which is really important, they
bring in measuring - it sounds deeply boring,

but I'm very interested in this deeply boring
subject!

It is important, particularly for the finance
company and they see it is good governance.

If you're - you can use that as a proxy for
their general corporate governance.

The country and the private sectors actors
in that company become more investable so

money can start to flow in.

A carbon price, even at its first step, which
is just about the governance of it, causes

a shift potentially in development, and we
often underestimate that we don't really talk

about it enough, I don't think.

The other final thing: if I can make a parallel
with corporates, there is also a sort of revenue

recycling piece that happens with some of
them with their internal carbon price.

Some set up a fund.

Microsoft is the most interesting example,
because they are very proud of it, and they've

grown it.

They started out and five dollars.

Their data Serbs had to pay the most.

They created an internal fund and staff bid
in with projects as to how you would use that

money.

Data centres were prioritised to increase
their clean energy use, and the prosumer idea

came force and Microsoft is 100 per cent - this
is the same as the macro economy.

You get the citizens involved.

The staff come forward with ideas of how Microsoft
can help companies decrease emissions.

You see an internal carbon price playing the
same role it can in a macro economy.

Let me ask Janelle and tell me what the audience
has been saying, and perhaps they have questions

as well.

We would love to hear an update on the poll.

Where is the carbon price?

There you go.

Trying to get that centred for you.

When I left you last, we asked how high should
carbon be priced in 2020 to be effective?

The majority said the price should be 40 to
59 dollars per tonne of CO2.

The next biggest think it should be priced
way above 100 dollars.

Four per cent think 20 per cent - 20 dollars
to 39 dollars should be the price range.

There is four per cent also who think it should
cost nothing.

So not everybody behind carbon pricing here,
but I can tell you that among the panels,

this seems to be the one that has garnered
a fair bit of anticipation.

Some have said that it's the panel they've
been looking forward to the most.

Lots of positive feedback here.

I'm just scrolling through.

In addition to that, our participants, and
our viewers at home, appear to be very impressed

by Sweden's carbon tax.

If you don't remember anything about Sweden,
just remember 75 per cent GDP and 26 per cent

emissions reduction just because of carbon
tax.

So this sentiment has been repeated all throughout
Twitter, so an achievement there for that

particular presentation.

Questions for the panel from Mark."Is there
a way to incorporate carbon pricing in imported

goods pricing?

Market effects cat lies by low ... by the
market."

Here is another one from Graham Wheel, "Could
the cost of climate abatement be linked to

the carbon price?"

Here is another one that is not related to
carbon pricing but is a very for Mr Kurtyka.

Poland has set a target by 2025.

Germany had a similar goal which few belief
can be achieved.

So a reaction on that, sir?

That's it from my side.

I will let you take that question first, and
the others can think about who would like

to address the other two questions: carbon
taxes in imports, and abatement linked with

carbon pricing.

Please, Mr Kurtyka.

Thank you very much.

We believed that we should make a step forward
in terms of penetration of EVs in our transport

and mobile system.

Poland has something like 20 million cars
on our roads, so one million is a lot, but

it is only five per cent, if I may say, also.

So, we need to - we are conscious of this
dilemma.

But, we know of course our colleagues in Germany
have set up a little bit more ambitious objective

of one million electric vehicles by 2020.

It seems that it might be difficult - although
I would prefer that our German colleagues

directly take this question - but regarding
2025, what makes me optimistic about our target

is not only the question of public policy,
but most importantly of technological progress,

because everything shows that somewhere between
2020 and 2022/23, industrial combustion engine

less competitive in terms of total cost of
ownership compared with electric vehicle.

So, when we take technology as an ally, and
not try to impose something administratively,

only by saying yes, we politicians believe
in something, but I think that we politicians

and governments, we should again use technical
psychiatry as the best ally, and put our bets

and our targets at the best, taking into account
how technological progress, and how economics

would help us achieve the objective.

So, I think that 2025, one million electric
vehicles in Poland is an ambitious objective,

although I believe it is achievable.

Would you like to address - the German picture
there, and you could also pick up on the other

two questions if you wanted.

As a German, I can be very pessimistic as
always!

It's simple: we've been successful in the
deployment of renewables, but we haven't been

successful to reduce emissions.

Along the lines Sweden has shown.

Therefore, I believe we need the next important
step for the Energiewende is a carbon price,

and therefore, it is the carbon price floor
is the right way to go, and I hope, indeed,

that Germany take the offer of France, and
here, I would like to emphasise that you promised

something between a phase-out of nuclear pour,
and something to reduce nuclear power, so

you might find the right wording here.

[Laughter].

Carbon pricing is not just - must just not
be perceived in Germany as subsidising nuclear

power.

You know it is one thing that's in the Chairman's
debate.

I hope we can have a strong French-German
coalition, and not just leaving that the carbon

price floor but within that coalition to broaden
to an extent to - this would be in the best

interests to make the chairman of energy transition
in the end to a success.

So, to the other questions on these tariffs
on carbon imports, I have to say I'm not a

big fan of this adjustment - border tax adjustment,
and I will tell you why.

In many countries like China, the export sector
is much less carbon intensive than domestic

sector.

You're at radioactive to increase the global
scale even the emissions.

So, in that sense, I would say the most important
thing is to he did pound the coalition of

carbon pricing.

There's no doubt if just one country would
impose a carbon price, it would loose competitiveness.

This is the reason why we have the Paris Agreement
because we need to have international co-operation.

The most important thing is we should use
carbon pricing to enhance reciprocity in these

negotiations.

You said, rightly, as soon as you have a carbon
price, it will be made transparent.

It makes the whole thing in a much more digestible
way for the other party.

Therefore, I hope that, in the end, we would
come up with the situation where we could

use even carbon pricing as a means to measure
our NVCs, and so on.

This would be a lot to do, and this would
be the right way to do it.

The other questions about carbon pricing and
abatement -

We addressed it to some degree when talking
about the channels of -

Ideally, it affects the marginal costs of
abatement.

Again, this is an on the thing of economy
-

Rather than get into that, in the remaining
three minutes of our panel, I would like to

ask whether any of you have a final comment
that you would like to make before we close?

I will just open the floor, and Madame?

Perhaps just briefly, so, yes, we are serious
about closing some of our nuclear reactors,

but anyway, I just wanted to say, sometimes,
when we talk about a carbon price, there is

a lot of - some people anticipate mismatches
between the carbon tax at the borders, and

the fact that it may be negative to competitiveness.

One of the things that France is trying to
push forward at the European level is a carbon

inclusion mechanism.

So, we know it is very ambitious, it is complicated
to implement, but we think it is one of the

ways of actually making sure that it doesn't
effect our competitiveness.

Obviously, other countries, such as, for example,
China, are actually less too intensive, then

it may be a problem for us.

But that's in the very long run.

Anybody else have a final word?

I want to say, this is very crucial, the question
we are discussing, because we have to do something

on the earth, really, really.

And, for example, what you're talking about,
the price floor, Sweden has reintroduced carbon

tax on electricity power plants, because we
thought that the price on the trade system

was too low, so, from 1 January, we also have
a higher price.

We think it's a good idea.

We think the most interest for the Swedish
carbon tax comes from other parts of the world,

not so much from Europe.

We are often invited by the United Nations
to talk about it, and we see a lot of countries

in other parts of the world are introducing
carbon tax.

We think it is the way forward.

Thank you very much.

Anyone else?

A quick comment on the Twitter poll.

It is interesting, in parallel to the Commission,
the high-level commission on carbon prices,

running with Women Business Coalition their
carbon pricing Corridor Initiative, the chemical

industry, looking at the types of prices they
can use in their scenario analysis when stress-testing

against carbon-related price signals in the
economy.

The power sector one is interesting because
it comes out for the 2020s much lower than

the Twitter poll in the G20 countries, from
a private sector perspective, and these are

pretty big players in the power sector world.

I find that interesting.

The reason why they say that is true is because
the cost curves are coming down.

They don't see us needing it - the floor price,
for example, won't need to be that dramatic,

it just needs to be there in a way, because
actually they know the technological changes

they go through, it is known, and in the short
to medium term, we will have enough of a technological

breakthrough in most of the areas that they
need, and that, in fact, it's about some of

the alternative policies the investment in
grid infrastructure, et cetera, but they don't

think it is just about that carbon-price level
that's really the key piece there.

So it's actually lower from a private sector
perspective in terms of what they think is

needed to become zero carbon than what the
audience thinks.

I find that interesting as well from a more
optimistic perspective.

Mr Jakobsson did say to keep low and start
turning it up.

You started it around 30 in Sweden in 26.

Yes.

So, many, many thanks to all of you.

This has been a very, very interesting exchange,
and I think we can give you a very warm round

of applause.


