How can we use carbon pricing revenues effectively?

Carbon pricing puts a price on the environmental
cost of emitting greenhouse gases.

It provides incentives for individuals and
industries to reduce their emissions by pricing

carbon across all sectors, in theory, carbon
emissions will be cut first where marginal

avoid is lowest, this can trigger a low carbon
economy.

More and more countries are introducing carbon
taxes or schemes.

Carbon Reasons amounted to $33 billion US.

How should we use the revenues?

Distribute the money back to the people?

Cut other taxes?

Finance public goods and research?

So, I would like to start by inviting Dr.
Brigitte Knopf.

Excuse me.

Brigitte Knopf, I was told, who is a secretary
general at Mercator research institute on

global commons and climate change and give
a brief report on the pricing as a key author

on a key unit report.

Thank you very much.

On this report, it's a report issued annually.

And normally we analyze the gap in emissions
between what the countries promise in terms

of emission reduction and what is actually
needed to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement,

right?

And we experience that this gap in emission
is growing in the last year.

That's not really a very promising news.

But last year we also concentrated on the
policies needed.because in the end we say

we have a gap in emissions that translate
and a gap in policies.

You could say a policy gap.

And we measured this in terms of carbon pricing
because we think that carbon pricing is a

very important element in the policy mix that
we need for the energy transition.

And we came up with a number showing that
only 10% of these emissions are priced at

a level that would be required to achieve
the 2 degrees target.

So, a huge gap in emissions and a huge gap
in the policy of carbon pricing.

Excellent.

Thank you very much.

So, to pick up on that discussion, I'm going
to start first and foremost by introducing

the distinguished gentlemen and then have
them react to carbon pricing in the context

of their countries.

So, right immediately to my left here we have
the minister for energy and natural resources

and the minister responsible CoteNord region
of Quebec.

And then from the 
office of energy of Switzerland, that is Revaz.

And the former chair of the California energy
commission and executive Vice President Robert

Weisenmiller.

So, without further ado I'm going to ask Jonatan
to let us know the experience with carbon

pricing.

But more importantly, what are you doing with
the revenues that your model realized?

Thank you very much for inviting me.

We are here to discuss the consequences of
climate change.

And in Quebec we should probably start by
explaining our system.

So, Quebec has about four times larger than
Germany and we have a very special situation

there because our energy system is rather
special.

Around 99% of our power comes from renewables
simply because 90% of that capacity is derived

from our hydro power plants.

We have 4% wind energy and the remainder is
generated by natural oil.

So, if you look at 
the energy sector you find that only 49% comes

from renewables.

So, we are the battery for the northwest of
Canada.

We are facing the same challenges as all the
others.

We need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and we have introduced a mechanism that seems

to be working very well, I think.

So, we have an ETS system and we've established
that in cooperation with California.

And over the past few years we've generated
billions of dollars.

So, the system is rather simple.

We have minimum carbon price.

And we also have a cap on emissions.

And we're lowering this cap on emissions which
means that we are generating revenue

which comes from these systems.

And the real challenge, really, is not so
much to collect these revenues, but to distribute

it.

So, of course, the citizens and industry both
want a pay back.

And they also want to ensure that we invest
in efficiency.

This is another important leg of our system.

So, we do have programs in Quebec that allow
us to fund industry or support industry as

they make the transition to more sustainable
production technology.

We have a 3 billion fund which is called the
Green Fund.

And we are using this green fund to support
our work to mitigate climate change.

So, we provide subsidies for electric cars
so that people could switch to electric mobility.

We also help with the transition away from
oil to other more climateneutral ways of generating

energy.

In Quebec we have a lot of water.

And we have hydro power, which as I said,
is very important for our country.

So, that's really what makes us rich.

It's our prosperity comes from water.

And this, of course, is a major opportunity
for us.

Also, for in terms of our economic development
because it means that we can redistribute

this revenue.

Thank you very much.

Absolutely.

So, I'm just going to very quickly move to
you, minister Revaz.

We happen to know for a fact that Switzerland
has over a billion dollars, 1.33 I think at

last count, in carbon revenues.

How are you using those revenues?

How to the people benefit?

Thank you for the question.

Actually, we do have a CO2 levy.

I'm talking about in levy in Germany, we say
erheben.

It's the proceeds from the levy are redistributed
and we have two mechanisms to do that.

Up to onethird of this amount is serving for
program, a refurbishment program for buildings.

And the twothirds are redistributed.

One to the population through a rebate on
health insurance costs.

And on the other one to businesses for a rebate
on wage costs.

We were able to introduce that through this
mechanism on stationary fuels only and not

on transport fuels.

For transport fuels, the importers must offset
part of the emissions as they induce both

domestically and internationally, these offsetting.

Fantastic.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Fair enough.

So, I'm gonna just allow Robert here to give
us some comment.

Specifically talking about the cap and trades.

When we talk about California, US, cap and
trade comes to mind.

And have you generated any revenue and what
are you doing with that revenue?

That's very good.

Thanks very much and thank you for the opportunity
to be here today.

California, if it were a separate country
would be the fifth largest economy.

We're dealing right now with our changing
climate.

So, we really put focus on policies to really
address greenhouse gas emissions.

And certainly, one of the key ways to do that
is by putting a price on carbon.

Now, with that price I would say in California
that's been a very bipartisan program.

It started out under Governor Schwarzenegger
and continued under Governor Brown and has

been extended by a twothirds vote in the legislature.

That was, again, very bipartisan.

One of the things that's really driven that
degree of bipartisanship is the ability to

invest the proceeds in ways to help us with
the transition.

So, at this point cumulatively it's like $9.3
billion.

So, that's a lot of money.

Now, having said that, it's a very political
process to decide how to allocate the money.

And one of the thing that we do is we rebate
to residential and commercial customers the

charge on their power and gas bills.

So, that every quarter customers see a basically
a reduction in their power costs that comes

from greenhouse gas emissions.

Now, having said that, the two drivers that
really go through how to allocate the money.

One is obviously to do investments that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.

And for California, about half of our greenhouse
gas emissions are for transportation.

A fair amount of money goes into the transportation,
goes into zero emission vehicles.

Goes into charge, certainly goes into different
programs for goods movement.

And also, into our communities to move to
a manysustainable, more workable, more bikeable

areas.

So, a lot of money goes in that direction.

At the same time, high speed rail gets 25%.

We basically see high speed rail as a key
part of really trying to change or transform

our transportation system.

Now, at the same time obviously it's important
that everyone benefits from California's programs

and not just the early adopters who tend to
be fairly well to do.

So, about half of the revenues, you know,
are invested in areas that can help our lower

income citizens or disadvantaged communities.

And that can be a variety of different technologies
or programs.

But the idea is to make sure that that's really
something for everyone.

And it's also very important to make this
very transparent.

So, every year the air board puts out its
climate investment report that will go through

and identify exactly where the money is going.

And exactly what the benefits are.

To really, again, you have to maintain the
political support.

And one of the things that's really important
in getting that support is making sure everyone

benefits.

Particularly the ones who are disadvantaged.

Fantastic.

So, had a couple of quite a few reinvestment
opportunities here that are sort of across

the board.

So, electric vehicles obviously are taking
prominence in terms of where we're spending

the carbon revenues.

You know, we're talking about health.

Health subsidies as well.

Wage subsidies I believe I heard.

And then from California, residential power
and gas bills are going down.

That's good to know.

I lived in California for ten years.

That's good to know that's where it's going.

Infrastructure development.

You know, charging stations for the vehicles.

Walkable cities and the rail.

So, it sounds like across the board there's
a lot of thought around how these moneys will

get redistributed.

And obviously some lower income programs and
maybe in our next round will get into more

of those.

I'm going to turn to you, Dr.Knopf.

How does that sound as a person looking at
it from a more technical, academic level?

Does that sound like what the models say we
should be spending the money on?

For this question, it's not a good idea to
look at the models, but to look at the different

countries and what they are doing.

We heard three spotlights here.

What we did in the report is analyzed a set
of countries and looked where they implemented

a price on carbon or faced subsidies.

This is often more important in developing
countries to look for phasing out fossil fuel

subsidies because they set the wrong incentives.

And then we already heard it.

It's important to think about what do you
do with the revenues.

And you have to spend them in such a way that
this ensures a just transition, right?

So, it should increase acceptability.

And we identified let's say five major channels.

How you could redistribute the revenues.

And the first one is to have direct cash transfers.

So, either to firms or to affected households.

This is one channel.

The second one is you could decrease personal
or corporate income taxes.

So, having it in a fiscal policy framework
and getting the incentives right within this

text framework.

The third aspect that was mentioned before
is to invest in low carbon technologies or

low carbon infrastructures, right?

So, this is important.

The fourth one you could think about having
special assistance for poorer areas or, for

example, areas that are mostly affected by
such a transition.

And Germany would say coal regions, for example.

And the fifth channel is then more dedicated
to the companies who are in the international

competition and that might need some assistance.

For example, steel or aluminum or so on.

So, these are five general channels and we
have very good examples.

So, from a scientific point of view, these
are role models.

And, yeah.

It's important.

And you mentioned it's also important to have
a full transparency of the revenues, of the

use of the revenues.

And this is our experience when looking at
different countries.

The acceptance increasing is increasing with
the transparency of how the revenues are used.

Sounds good.

So, we've talked we've gone very quickly to
very successful programs that have been implemented

in Quebec and in Switzerland and in California,
obviously.

So, we're going to take a quick interlude
to hear what you have to say about this subject.

But when I come back to the panel, I would
like you to share a little bit about the challenge

putting together these models.

And also hone in on how you got acceptance
for the community.

The individuals and obviously the businesses
that are probably paying more who have been

impacted.

How did you get collect buyin for successful
models?

When we come back, we can talk about those.

Mr.Dialogue, please.

Let's talk about the results of the three
questions here.

If I can get those up on the screens here.

The questions, I think, were pretty straightforward.

The first one, an effective climate policy
needs a price on carbon.

We have our first 100% agreement.

I had a joke prepared just in case somebody
disagreed.

But you behaved so well that you don't have
to listen to my humor.

So, congratulations.

Do you think green fiscal policies such as
a carbon tax can help raise a country's welfare?

It would be interesting to know what the 6%
noes give as reasons.

If you want to Tweet us that.

That might also be an interesting contribution.

And finally, in your opinion, what carbon
price should be rightly adopted?

This is really the key question.

We all agree that we want to have carbon prices.

But we also heard earlier, I think it was
yesterday, that most of actually our emissions

are under some kind of a carbon price worldwide.

So, the question is, how do we get an effective
carbon price?

And the group generally agrees that around
50 Euros to a hundred Euros, it starts to

look effective.

Does anyone know what the carbon price is
in the EU today?

It fluctuates.

There's a trading market.

Anyone know?

Shout it out.

24 Euros.

Give that man a lollipop.

I just looked it up and that's right on the
money there.

So, we are short of what this group would
still consider to be relatively effective.

So, I would also like to have two Tweets.

One of them I showed earlier.

So, it was the one that basically said what
are the obstacles?

If carbon price are so great, why don't we
have them?

And the second one from some guy, Craig Morris.

I don't know who this guy is.

Carbon price is necessary, but not sufficient.

It would help us transition from diesel and
gasoline cars to electric vehicles, but it

won't automatically get us to cycling infrastructure,
for instance.

So, if this is the lowhanging fruit, if carbon
prices are the lowhanging fruit, are we fail

so good see the tree?

We still have our work cut off.

Thank you Mr.Craig Morris.

I like how he snuck that one in there.

And the rest of the panel, the reactions from
the poll questions.

And then the barriers which we asked again
on Twitter, you know, the challenges to this

issue.

And then if we have time, I really want to
hear your specific country's experience on

what you're doing on the transparency issue.

You know, what does that look like?

Is it a legislative process?

You know, how do we let your citizens know
about about this and how do you get an acceptance

from that?

Okay.

So, those are very many questions all together.

But let's just start with responding to the
audience.

You know, and I'll start with you, sir.

Yeah.

Oh, I enjoyed to see the results of the survey.

I think the biggest challenge for the carbon
market in Quebec, I think we are on a gad

track, actually.

We want to show that the action of states
is important.

We talked about transparency and it is really
a fundamental issue.

We must show that the revenues are being redistributed.

But we also need to talk about the efficiency
of this measure.

If we say the sums are redistributed in this
and that way, then that's a good thing.

And we've done that in Quebec.

The revenue goes into the green fund and it's
a positive thing.

We need to show in our programs and in our
measures that they are efficient.

A ton of carbon costs $20 on the market today.

On the Quebec market.

We are taking measures.

We are subsidizing vehicles.

It costs $8,000 to that costs us $8,000.

And it's we have allocated or we are expecting
$200 per ton within 20 or 30 years.

So, the ton is being sold expensively.

Is this the best for us?

We could also provide subsidies.

We could also make better subsidies for the
public transport sector.

We have to look at what measures are best
suited.

How do we best reinvest the revenue to have
the optimal effect?

The measures must be for the.

And then they will be wellaccepted by the
public.

Yes, we have a certain tax, but we see that
the tax has a positive effect that it provides

a contribution to mitigating climate change.

And we do see the reduction in greenhouse
gases.

Could you speak to a challenge?

You know, when you first introduced this and
you're setting up the green fund, was that

an easy path?

Or did you have to overcome some barriers?
at the beginning the biggest challenge was

to communicate.

That we all wanted it.

We included everyone, all the stakeholders
including the trade union.

So, we had a good system of communication.

Many people accepted this.

We want to maintain this acceptance.

We need to show the public and businesses
that it's a good thing.

We need to show them that we are efficient.

That the measures that are being taken are
efficient.

Well, it may be accepted on the first day.

But even years later it must still be accepted.

We can't allow our citizens to say, well,
money was invested in Quebec.

But the government did not manage to get efficient
results from it.

The big challenge is that the investments
are efficient.

We need to have positive results.

In Quebec it's clear.

We need to be courageous and we need to show
that it's a longterm thing.

The gentlemen have spoken.

So just give us wrap-up in terms of putting
it together with what you've studied.

So, I'm going over to you, Minister Revaz.

So, three things, again, if you could comment
on the polls, I'm sure you will agree.

But you might have some additional commentary.

Some of the challenges Switzerland has experienced.

And also, how you dealt with transparency
and acceptance of your citizenry.

Yeah, thank you.

I would like to react to the surcharge we
saw.

And my reaction would be to wish good luck
to a government wishing to start a 100 Euros,

80 Euros per ton by taxing CO2.

In Switzerland we spent seven years with only
voluntary measures.

No flow.

Then we saw that it was not working.

So, we started with a CO2 levy at 12 Euros
per ton.

And with an automatic mechanism adapting the
levy if we don't reach our targets.

And now as it's today, we are at 90 Euros
per ton.

We can go up to 110.

And we are revising the law to be able to
go up to 210 Euro.

210, 200 Euros per ton.

And then on the mechanism.

There is no onesizefitsall mechanism for the
different stakeholders.

For the large industry, you need the ETS,
the trading systems.

Then for the SMEs, we introduced a carrot
and stick program.

Making it possible for the companies, for
the SMEs to make agreements, target agreements

for reaching different targets of reduction.

And if they don't reach these targets, they
have to pay a fine of 125 Swiss Francs, 125

Euros for CO2 and to compensate this target.

Excellent.

I still just want to press you a little bit
here.

You started at 12.

You're now at a hundred.

How is that transition?

How long did it take?

How many years?

And what did you do to make sure that, you
know, that this increase is accepted?

It took eight years.

Eight year
And the niche was defined, knowing that if

you didn't reach the target, it was going
up.

We have this redistribution mechanism.

Everyone sees on his bill, his insurance bill
how much he gets back from the levy.

Right.

Just curious.

We only have three, four countries represented
here.

I would be curious perhaps on Twitter if you
have experiences from your country if you

could let us know that experience as well.

That would be fantastic.

Over to you, Mr.Weisenmiller.

Yeah, a couple things I wanted to say.

First of all, the debate we've had back and
forth has been between whether to do a tax

or to do cap and trade.

Now, we've done cap and trade.

So, we know where we're heading on the greenhouse
gas level.

And the question is, what is the associated
revenue out of the options?

Obviously if you did a tax, you would know
the revenue.

But you would not necessarily know what the
savings were.

I would say Secretary Schultz to this day
insists we should have done a tax instead

of cap and trade.

Now the reality is with cap and trade, that's
part of a much broader series of programs.

So, that and a lot of the policy debate in
California has been between some sort of control

mechanism, you know, basically doing it through
regulations or doing it through a market mechanism.

And indeed, you know, we have a variety of
programs.

For example, we have appliance efficiency
standards.

We have new construction has to meet specified
standards.

We have rebates.

So, we have a variety of programs.

So, at this point, it's really part of the
portfolio programs is cap and trade.

It's not the only thing we're doing.

And, you know, at this point the prices are
relatively low.

They're like $15.

We're not near the $100, we're not near the
level you would expect to have major impacts.

But we have a variety of other programs which
are, again, driving things.

And as we reduce the cap, we anticipate the
prices will go up.

And so, certainly that means if you were an
agricultural processer or, you know, anything

else, you're going to be making investments
now to try to deal with that increasing prices.

Obviously one of the things we worry about
is leakage of people moving, you know, manufacturing

out of California because of that.

And so, again, you know, we really have to
do a lot of innovation to make it easier to

go through the transformation.

Although we have not spent very much money
on research and development out of the cap

and trade program.

We have other means of funding that.

But again, it's just got to be a very broad
portfolio to really address the problems.

Excellent.

So, you touched a little bit on some of the
criticism the cap and trade scheme in California,

certainly in the US.

So, how do you respond to people that say,
oh, how do you respond to criticism that suggests

that it just allows you to continue pollution
because you can buy your way out of it.

You can just transfer, you know, your carbon
emissions to another jurisdiction.

Maybe subSaharan Africa.

That's a real issue that we are concerned
about.

I mean, the reality is the California economy
is growing very vibrant.

And at the same time, we are achieving real
reductions in our greenhouse gas emissions.

Now, again, you're back to the question of,
how do you allocate the goods being produced

elsewhere?

You know, how does that look?

And, you know, one of the things which we
see California's role is, you know, California's

1% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions.

So, that while we're really suffering right
now from the consequences of changing climate,

we see the ability of California to show that
it's possible to grow the economy while reducing

greenhouse gas emissions and to partner with,
you know, along with the relationship we have

with Quebec which has been a fantastic one
from the very start.

Unfortunately, many other states and provinces
dropped off along the way.

We have a relationship with China as they
put in place emission training scheme to say,

okay, what's worked in California?

What are the things to watch out for?

So, again, we see California more as a laboratory.

Certainly, we have made mistakes and hopefully
people can learn from those mistakes.

But we've also shown how you can help transform
your economy.

Excellent.

Thank you.

Excellent.

I would like to hand over to you, Dr.Knopf,
to just comment on what you've heard.

Yeah, thank you.

I would like to comment on two issues.

The first one is on the price, which kind
of price is needed.

So, there was a commission set up.

It's called the high-level commission on carbon
prices that was led by Steigler and Goldstein,

they found 40$80 are needed by 2020.

This is the range.

And, of course, this depends very much on
the additional policies that you implement.

Because we all know that we will not have
one carbon pricing and then the full mitigation

is done.

But we need additional measures.

But that's the range that they came up with
that gives an indication for that.

And then the question I think it's quite interesting.

When carbon pricing is so convincing, why
isn't it not done in more countries, right?

And our analysis is that it's it's not only
about information, but it's really how to

communicate the whole issue.

So, you said before, you call it a levy.

And this already makes a change, right?

If you just call it a tax or if you just say
it's a very economically efficient instrument,

it's not very attractive.

So, calling it a levy might be a better idea.

Or some call it a climate dividend.

So, wording matters and the who will framing
matters.

For example, punishment of fossil fuels that
I used, or make a success story.

So, incentivize investments in the green technology.

That's a success story and a very efficient
economic instrument.

That's very attractive.

This is one important component in the communication.

And I really recommend everybody to read the
World Bank report.

It's called Communicating Carbon Pricing.

And I think there are very interesting elements
in there to put this forward.

So, this is important an important point.

And then, of course, when you introduce carbon
pricing, it's also important to think about

timing and sequencing of different instruments
and the timing is important, for example,

if you put very quickly a very high price
economy.

That's very difficult to sell.

And I think this was also one of the reasons
with the yellow vest movements in France,

that have reasons.

But one was a very high price.

And that's difficult for the population.

Excellent , excellent.

Two challenges Amy hearing, where you put
the price point and when you put the price

point and how you communicate that, right?

So, in our last five minutes, if I missed
anything in the summation.

If there's something that you feel has not
been discussed, then I'm going to give you

each maybe a minute because we have a hard
stop in about five minutes.

I'm going to give each of you a minute to
give your closing remarks.

If there's any burning Tweets, Mr.dialogue,
you want to present, put your hand up, I'll

let you come.

Otherwise we're just going to close our session
with a quick lightning round of your parting

remarks.

Yes, sir.

So, it was very interesting to hear about
the different challenges and the communication

is indeed the most important so that everyone
understands what we do.

The initial price must be adapted to the process.

And I believe that the method we've chosen
in California and Quebec to reduce greenhouse

gases is a good one.

But it's a very soft way of doing things,
I believe.

And the mistake that we made in Quebec is
we have this we have this state company transition

energy, and we found the that too late.

In 2017 only.

Emission trading was in existence and there
was no transparency beforehand.

That is a challenge every day to show why
it is important to work the way we do.

And to explain the government action as well.

Thank you.

My summary is that carbon pricing is an important
policy instrument for the Paris Agreement,

for fulfilling the Paris Agreement.

The gap is still huge.

But the good news is that carbon pricing creates
revenues and they can be used in such a way

that a just transition is ensured, and no
one is left behind.

And the energy transition is not based on
the burden of the poor.

We see many countries for that already.

Thank you very much.

Every time somebody says leaving no one behind,
peoplecentered solutions, it makes my heart

sing.

Thank you.

Mr.Benoit Revaz.

Benoit Revaz: Thank you.

Continuing on the same topic is mobilizing
the citizens are deciding on the carbon pricing

at the end of the parliament.

The representatives and the citizens.

But it's still very important to mobilize
the industry and the companies on that.

Because their competitiveness is very much
concerned about that.

And to give ambitious but reachable targets.

Linked with proper pricing for this.

Excellent.

Yeah.

I was just going to hit the process question.

In California, the 9.3 million, the cumulative
impact.

That goes through the budget process every
year.

1.4, 1.8 billion, the legislature decides
how to allocate it.

Some of it is high speed rail, form you laic.

Frankly they can change any of those numbers.

That means in July there would be a decision
on how the money is appropriated and that

will go through a process of competitive.

Now, if we're going to put so much actually,
some of it, if we're doing weatherization

programs, there's a state agency that does
the weatherization programs.

But if we're going to say, put if we're giving
out rebates.

Again, that's pretty straightforward.

But if we're giving money for local communities
to really change their land use planning.

That will mean all local communities get a
chance to compete for that.

And so, at this point there's about 3 billion
of the 9 that has been appropriated, allocated

and actually implemented.

But the rest of it is somewhere in that process.

You know?

But again, it's a very, you know, legislature,
you can imagine, looking at it one year and

saying, you know, what about agriculture?

Or what about these communities?

They're making adjustments.

It just so, it's a very transparent process.

But frankly it takes a while to get the money
out and to spend it wisely.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much for those comments.

I think the audience will agree that we can
use carbon pricing revenue efficiently to

ensure a just and fair transition to a low
carbon economy.

It's not all a path of roses, it's not a piece
of cake.

But it can be done.

And we definitely have seen concrete examples
of how countries have done that.

I want to thank you very much, panelists.

And would you please join me in congratulating
them?


