What are the central challenges and solutions
for the energy transition?

The energy market is in full transition.

We are seeing decarbonization, increasing
renewables and improvements in infrastructure

around the globe.

This transition process is creating new challenges
which need to be addressed.

How do you provide clean and reliable energy
at minimum cost?

How do you adapt infrastructure to decentralized
energy production?

How do you flexiblize your system to accommodate
volatile renewable energy?

Markets around the world showcase that finding
solutions for these challenges is certainly

a mission possible.

Thank you very much.

I would like to first start our conversation
the director for energy transition commissions,

Miss Faustine Delasalle.

She will begin with introductory remarks.

Thank you very much, it's a great honor to
be here among ministers.

I feel very humbled to be here.

I'm the director of an organization called
the energy transitions commission.

And three years ago, a set of global leaders
from across the energy landscape, energy consuming

businesses, energy producing businesses as
well as equipment providers, finance players

and environmental NGOs came together to create
this energy transitions commission with the

objective of figuring out whether they could,
despite their differences, agree on a way

forward to reach low carbon energy systems
that would enable energy for all.

So, that was three years ago.

Then in October last year, and we've heard
about that this morning, the APPC published

a report showing the types of trajectories
in terms of carbon emissions that would be

required to reach a 1.5-degree scenario.

And we've heard this morning again how important
it is to reach that 1.5-degree scenario and

the fact that this is life or death threat
for some countries and populations including

the Maldives about which we were speaking
this morning.

So, that was published in October.

And in November the energy transitions commission
published a report that looked like a response

to the IPPC report.

And this report was called Mission Possible.

And we concludes in this report that it is
technically and economically feasible to reach

net zero carbon emissions from the energy
and industrial systems without relying on

offsets from the land use sector globally
by midcentury.

Probably 2050 in developed economies, 2060
in developing economies.

I want to run you through how we reached that
conclusion.

We reached that conclusion saying, well, there
are four transition strategies that are required

to get there.

The first of these transition strategies is
energy productivity improvement.

The reason energy productive improvements
matters is because the more progress we make

in terms of how we use energy, the less investment
we will require to actually shift our energy

systems to low carbon.

So, this is absolutely crucial.

And we need a doubling of energy efficiency
improvement rate globally.

And this can be done through energy efficiency
technologies that exist.

But there's also real untapped potential that
we've uncovered in the economy.

Our calculations show that if we were much
more efficient in our use of materials, steel,

cement, plastics and recycled them better,
we could use carbon emissions from heavy industry

by 40% globally.

That's not a marginal contribution to the
fight against climate change.

The second key transition, and we've heard
a lot about it this morning, is power decarbonization.

Here we published in 2016 an analysis that
showed that it was possible to run grids relying

at 8590% on intermittent renewables.

And this in a costcompetitive way we were
forecasting by 2045.

Since then I think the facts have caught up
with us and indeed our chair is asking me

to remove this analysis from our website because
he feels we're now looking ridiculous because

the facts have caught up with us too quickly.

So, power decarbonization is definitely on
the way.

The third transition we then need is to use
this clean power to electrify a greater number

of sectors.

And especially what we've called the easier
to abate sectors, manufacturing, buildings,

sectors for which electrified technologies
already exist and are most of the time already

costcompetitive or nearly so.

And the fourth challenge is to decarbonize
the harder to abate sectors.

That's the unknown for most of us in the energy
transition.

How do you decarbonize heavy industry and
heavy-duty transport?

We've deep dived looking at six sectors, cement,
steel and plastic on the industry side, and

heavy shipping, transport and aviation.

After consulting with industry players, this
challenge is also technically feasible.

We can reach net zero emissions from those
sectors.

There's a range of technologies out there
in labs that can enable us to do so.

And our initial calculations show us that
we would reach that objective with an overall

cost of less than 0.5% of global GDP for those
sectors that are the harder to abate sectors

of the economy.

And globally, these sectors can be saw through
a range of four solutions, one is direct electrification.

We have discovered to our surprise that there's
a much greater scope of activities that can

be electrified than we initially thought.

The second is use of biomass as an alternative
for fossil fuels.

Although this solution might need to be very
carefully managed given the constraints on

land use globally.

And a third solution is carbon capture which
will be required as part of the mix of solutions.

And a fourth solution is the use of hydrogen.

And we actually believe that the use of hydrogen
could be multiplied very significantly, possibly

by 10 or more in the economy by midcentury.

And this hydrogen can in turn be produced
either through electrolysis or through carbon

capture.

It's actually a derivative of the other solutions.

So, we've reached the conclusion that this
was all feasible.

But feasible doesn't mean done.

Far from it.

I want to conclude by just highlighting a
few of the challenges that we've uncovered,

and I hope this will be a good basis for the
following discussion.

The first challenge is innovation.

For a range of those sectors, the easier to
abate sectors, innovations are already there.

And technologies are already there.

But what I want to highlight is that for us
to have solutions in the late 2030s or 2040s

for the harder to abate sectors of the economy,
we need to invest today in the technologies

that still need to reach markets.

So, that's a particularly important challenge.

The second one is obviously the cost differential
between green technologies and brown technologies.

This is less and less of an issue in the power
sector, but it is an important issue, for

instance, in heavy industry.

And there are several ways of looking at this
cost differential issue.

You can think of carbon pricing as a solution.

But you can also think as the decrease of
prices of renewables as a solution.

The lower the cost of your electricity, the
lower the cost of electrifying or using hydrogen

in industry.

So, cost of renewables can be a factor.

The third aspect is international competition.

This is not relevant for all sectors.

But it is particularly relevant for sectors
like steel or chemicals.

There are two political solutions to it that
might not be very well thought through yet

and I think there's further thinking to be
done on that front.

One is border tax adjustments.

If we can't find international solutions.

The other is to actually regulate at end product
level.

If we start regulating the amount of steel
that needs to go in a car, for instance, of

green steel, instead of regulating steel production,
then we could go around the international

competitiveness issue because it would apply
to the steel used in cars wherever the steel

is produced.

The fourth question is stock flow issue.

This is not much of an issue, for instance,
in line duty, we change cars often enough

then the technologies are deployed once they
are cost competitive.

But it is crucial in industry where plants
last 30, 40, 50 years and there might be stranded

assets.

And the key question is, how do we actually
pay for those stranded assets and who pays

for it?

The fifth challenge I wanted to highlight
the scale of zero carbon power needs.

Because our conclusion is that a lot of the
solution do decarbonize is to actually use

clean power.

Either directly or indirectly through the
use of hydrogen.

Our calculations show that we could need to
quadruple or quintuple power production by

midcentury depending how efficiently we use
power.

If that's the need, we not only need to decarbonize
our current power production, but we need

to meet the extra demand with renewables.

It's a hell of a challenge in terms the power
sector.

And finally, there will be winners and losers
in terms of industries.

But also, in terms of where those industries
are based.

And one of the key questions I suppose we'll
come back to the ministers around the table,

how to manage the redistributional effects
of that transition.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Thank you.

I've heard some good news there.

It is technically feasible.

I really want to take that take that away.

Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to be speaking
on several languages on the panel here, so

I just want to remind you that you have headsets
available.

We'll not be speaking in just English and
then over here to my right you will see a

list of channels.

Feel free to use the one that suits you.

The headsets are now in the back.

Okay.

We're going to begin.

And I would like to start by asking the panelists
to just give take five minutes with an introductory

statement.

Perhaps react to what has been put on the
table by Faustine.

But specifically, I would like you to talk
about your top three challenges, right?

Let's not get into solutions this time.

We will come back for the solutions.

Maybe there will be three solutions, maybe
more.

Your introductory statement, the top three
challenges.

Okay?

I would like the person to start our intervention
to be the Minister from Colombia.

Minister Suarez.

If you could start us off, that would be fantastic.

Hello.

Okay.

Hello, good afternoon to everybody.

First, thank you very much for the invitation
to this great event.

And I will like to highlight the effort that
the organization of this event has made to

make an event that has 60% of participations
on the panels.

Really, it's something that I haven't seen
yet in any other event.

Really the energy sector, we lack of women
participation.

So, I would really like to highlight that.

while going through our topic I will say that
regarding Colombia, Colombia is a place that's

full of challenges and full of opportunities
simultaneously.

So, we have the sixth cleanest energy matrix
in the world.

Because we have 70% of our electricity comes
from hydro.

20%, more or less, from gas and 10% out of
coal.

Even though we are a producer of coal, we
do export 90% of our coal.

But what that drives us to, and that has been
part of the discussion that we have heard

during the morning is that we're among the
one of the 20 most vulnerable countries to

climate change.

So, those are part of it.

I would say because we are so clean, we are
so vulnerable to climate change, phenomenons

and so on, we do suffer a lot.

So, first we are and we, as a participation
of the GDP and the total participation of

Colombia in the total CO2 emissions is only
.5%.

So, we alone cannot do anything to change
what is driving towards the effects of climate

change.

But we will suffer a lot from that.

So, how does that drive us into our government
and energy agenda?

So, first we have a full agenda regarding
climate change and regarding how we will comply

with our SDG goal for 2025 and 2030 and that
not only for the whole country but also for

the energy sector including the oil and gas
sector and including the electricity sector.

And that's something that will be the driver
of the agenda will see the guideline in general

and from that we have been setting an agenda
regarding how to introduce variable renewables.

And that's something that will be the driver
of the agenda will see the guideline in general

and from that we have been setting an agenda
regarding how to introduce variable renewables

into our energy matrix.

So, we have been in this process of doing
two types of action: one option is a reliability

auction.

That is the common way that Colombia uses
to expand its energy matrix are that option

for the first time we were able to achieve
1.4 gigabytes of wind and solar.

So that's pretty cool and that's around 7%
of the total energy matrix.

However, we need to make sure that we put
in place some mechanisms for long term contracts

to complement that reliability payment that
we have within

country and that's something that we're working
through we did have an auction of those long-term

contracts on February and it failed because
there wasn't enough participation on the demand

side.

We wanted to do a two-sided auction bid on
offer and we didn't have enough participation

on the bid side and I do believe that column
has a huge opportunity because it's very rich

on resources both on wind and solar.

On wind, just to give you an idea, on the
north part of the country we have onshore

and offshore opportunities for wind the average
speed of the wind in La Guajira, that it's

the north part of the country it's two times
the average wind speed of the world.

So definitely there is a huge opportunity
there.

And also because we are on the equator, we
do not have seasons.

We have places, where the whole year we have
a lot of intensity of sun.

So, that is a big opportunity there.

So, we are making sure that we can build a
full portfolio of energy generation, that

we can use our resources and make a diversification
of the energy sources of the electricity sources

for our electricity matrix and that will make
us more resilience and towards climate change.

And also, we hope that we can become an energy
exporter and the electricity exporter we have

interconnectivity with transmission line with
Ecuador.

And we're working one with Panama because
we do believe that if we build together regional

resources that will make us more efficiency
efficient as region.

So that's definitely something that we're
looking towards our challenges ahead.

So, the other two things will be second access
and you have been spoken this morning about

equality and house energy access those drives
equality and really to achieve the sustainable

and development goals.

We cannot afford to have people not having
energy access in Columbia.

We have still four hundred thousand families
without energy access and 1 million families

that cook out of dirty sources so wood or
oracle.

And that access agenda is something that it's
part of our, it's key on our agenda towards

our equality agenda.

And we're looking towards different options.

I do believe that solar individual and micro
grid solutions bring us an opportunity that

we didn't have before.

And we need to make sure that we speed up
that agenda.

And the third will be energy efficiency.

So, the energy efficiency we see a lot of
opportunities regarding the sector that I

drive that it's mining and hydrocarbons how
to make sure that.

However, they have to keep the pace on their
activity and that's something that we need

to fully understand that we will need mining
for a long-time energy transition will depend

a lot on copper for example.

So, there isn't an energy transition without
mining, but we need to make sure that mining

and hydrocarbon industry has the highest standard
possible to enable to make sure that they

do their activity in the most sustainable
way possible.

And for that we need to make sure that all
technology and innovation is put in place

in those places to make sure that we can deliver
in those ways.

Thank you very much!

well thank you.

there's a yes lots going on in Colombia, I
think.

The real mission possible is to talk about
challenges without solutions.

I think that's what I'm getting.

So, maybe I will just allow the interventive
to discuss challenges as well as solutions

together.

I could see that from the ministers like I
normally just talk about problems without

their corresponding solution.

I would like the next comment to be from the
point of view of Serbia is Ivica Dacic, the

prime minister from Serbia.

If you could give your comments as well.

That would be fantastic.

Thank you.

I'm the only minister of foreign affairs here
in this country.

And I came upon the and left here with the
ministers of energy.

But energy and politics have always been connected.

No crisis, no political crisis has gone without
consequences for energy or vice versa.

All energy crisis have always had elements
of political crisis.

I come from a country of Serbia.

A country which, of course, one of the consequences
of not having the sea.

As a consequence of climate change, it could
get a sea.

But this would, of course, mean catastrophe
for the neighboring countries including my

colleague from North Macedonia.

Nevertheless, bearing in mind that it is sure
that the global warming does not depend either

on Serbia or on Macedonia.

But mostly depends on the richest and biggest
countries in the world.

We join all the conventions which are of significance
for this area such as the climate effort.

and 
of energy.

First of the things is to ensure energy security.

To have stable energy supply.

The second question is the development of
the energy markets.

And third, of course, the transition of something
sustainable in energy.

To go pointbypoint, we are having the problem
of sufficient energy.

In the case of Serbia, we're speaking of oil
and gas.

Just like the European Union in all, Serbia,
maybe even a bit more, has the need to import

gas.

We only provide 20 20% of the domestic use
with the gas which is produced in Serbia.

At the same time, this transport system of
natural gas to Serbia has only one entrance.

It comes from Hungary.

That is, it comes from Russia via Ukraine.

And this is when it becomes a political issue.

What will happen the announcement on the halt
of gas supply from Ukraine become true?

This is why we are very attentive we pay close
attention to all the progress, to all the

projects which can allow our country to have
stable natural gas supply.

We also closely follow projects in which we
are not end-users as a country of transit

which of course would be very positive for
the energy stability of the entire region.

But I would also like to energy.

I have to say; this problem is the problem
of double standards when it comes to our need

to import Russian gas and your need to impart
gas from Russia.

When I say "Your," I mean, the European Union.

We face the situation in which political differences
regarding this issue have led to the obstruction

of this project which was highly useful for
Serbia.

And I'm speaking of the southern stream.

We are in a very unfavorable position because
for us gas does not have a national symbol.

Does in the have national significance for
Serbia.

And I'm sure for North Macedonia or Bulgaria
as well, this is a main issue of everyday

life.

How will we get gas?

And, of course, the issue of Russia and Russia's
influence through gas is as important.

But if Russia doesn't influence you through
gas, who are supplied by a north stream, I

don't see why it would be a problem for you
if we make a south stream or Turkish stream.

Does our gas does the gas which comes to Serbia
will bring more problems than the gas which

comes to you.

This is the question I raised because the
north stream was exempt from the third energy

package.

Whereas the south stream did not.

Do you think that we don't have the right
to gas?

If you don't allow us to have Russian gas,
give us someone else's.

Give us someone else's gas.

And where from?

Where from is a question.

Yes.

There is none.

This is the problem.

So, this is one part of the issue.

We need gas.

Another part of the issue that bearing in
mind that we don't have enough gas.

We have to use other means of energy and the
ways of producing energy by using coal, hard

fossil fuels.

This is how we compensate for the lack of
energy sources and this is how we give our

contribution to the environment pollution.

This is why I believe it is of highest significance
to have the connectivity, a strategic connectivity.

We need diversification of sources, of the
roots for energy supply.

We need interconnectivity between different
countries when it comes to energy market.

Speaking, of course, about the countries in
our region.

And the third thing is, speaking about the
energy transition, transition towards clean

technologies which would lead to better results
to reduce harmful gases reduction from 60,000

tons of harmful gases such as CO2.

Serbia has managed to reduce its contribution
in this regard.

This is our contribution to fighting climate
change.

Thank you.

It is a continuation of the geopolitical discussion
that we just had.

And I'm also seeing this interconnectedness
between, you know, the energy transition and

the political repercussions.

So, thank you for those remark.

I'm going to ask my other panelists to kindly,
you know, keep your comments quite short otherwise

it is possible that we will not have all of
us have a chance to really get on to the mission

possible discussion.

But I certainly appreciate, and I think the
audience sees the interconnectedness of the

issues.

Right?

So, the next person to give your instruction
is the deputy prime minister of North Macedonia.

Kocho Angjushev.

Thank you 
for your kind invitation.

It's a big part for me to be part of this
event.

It's really the huge number of people here
presented.

And showing the interest for this event.

I will start with some I can say showing that
we have found a more effective way to fight

the total fight against climate change.

We changed our country name to North Macedonia.

And now because we have "north" in the name,
it's a few centigrade colder and the problem

is solved.

But, of course, it's not.

We are helping our neighboring countries also.

But to be realistic, of course, this issue
is the bigger issue in the whole world.

And especially for the small countries like
our country.

North Macedonia has only 2 point something
million people, citizens.

And from this point of view, if we want to
say something specifically, I think that it's

most important to say that all of us we know
how we can replace I can say dirty technologies

for producing electricity.

Because all of us, we know about existing
technologies.

Those technologies are well known.

And, of course, depending on the nature of
resources in our country, it's the sun.

That means it's very convenient for installing
the photovoltaics and also wind.

From the point of hydropower plants, we use
the main part of the hydro potential in the

big hydropower plants and also in the small
hydropower plants creating and designing and

also implementing in the real projects more
than 100 small hydropower plants.

And a few big hydropower plants.

But we have a lot of space in photovoltaics
and in the wind.

But the main question is not about technology.

This is well known.

And fortunately, in the last period and last
years the price of this equipment became cheaper

and cheaper.

That is good information at this moment.

But the main question is not technology, not
technical skills.

The main question is how we can implement
this without big effect to the price of electricity

for the final customer.

This is the main question.

And we know about fuel models.

The model for the fitting tar roughs.

This model affects the price for the final
customer.

Especially for the poor countries where the
citizens are not very strong to pay this price

of electricity.

The second one is that we'll be subsidized
directly by the budget.

What is, again, some kind of subsidies for
inventive for investors because you will find

a lot of investors in the world.

If they can be sure that their projects are
feasible, and they can return their money.

This is this is main question in this project.

This is the first question.

And we find a way, I can I want to inform
all participants here which is present in

this hall that we switched our model from
fitting tariff to premium tariff.

We tried to decrease the investment cost of
the investors on the way where we, like the

government, we will give them land free of
charge and organize for all investors all

administrative procedures in the country free
of charge.

And in this way, we can decrease their caps.

And also, we will put this on the ocean procedure.

That means we will be transporting the procedure,
where the criteria will be the premium which

they're asking over the market price.

That means any investor can sell his electricity
on the market because market is liquid now

in our region.

And over this price they will obtain the premium
and the premium will be the criteria for the

tendering procedure.

We issue the tendering procedure for first
62 megawatts, which is small, but talk into

consideration that we are also a small country.

It means a lot.

Because until now we have only 18 megawatts
capacity in the photovoltaics.

And the potential is up to 300 megawatts.

And this is the plan.

And 300 magentas, the capacity is potentially
30% of all the capacity in the country.

Taking this into consideration, the first
62 megawatts will start this month.

And I'm using this opportunity to invite all
potential investors to invest and to participate

on this tendering procedure.

The second big issue and I will finish my
discussion for a half minute, let's say.

The second big issue is stability of the system.

Because how you're increasing the capacity
in renewable energy.

Renewable energy with today the possibility
for forecasts.

Weather forecast is predictable, but it's
not controllable.

You can predict, but you are not able to control.

And from this point of view you need to think
about stability of the system.

Because in the Balkan region we have a lot
of small countries.

In this case, we need the second approach.

The second approach is to have a regional
approach for balancing mechanism for keeping

the system stable.

This is very important.

And in this direction, we think a lot in this
moment, and we communicate a lot in the region

how to organize the common electricity market
where we will have the common stock exchange

for electricity to avoid all problems which
we have with the stability if we are thinking

like a small country, all of us.

For this point of view, we are discussing
for making the emergence of the markets between

now between North Macedonia and Bulgaria in
the first stage.

After that, I hope Serbia in the future and
Montenegro.

And I think this is crucially important because
without taking care about the stability of

the system and the secondary regulation of
the consequences of the renewable energy,

I think that their development is not possible.

This is also very important.

And, of course, we have to think about the
strong infrastructure.

Infrastructure for transporting electricity
to the final customer.

If I if I need to find only three main topics
for developing renewable energy, I think that

those three topics are very important.

First of all, how we can find the mechanism
to make the project attractive for investors.

The second one is for the small countries,
especially how we can keep stability of the

system.

And third, investment in infrastructure for
connecting.

Because, you know, sometimes the windmills
are on the top of the mountain.

They have to be connected to the grid.

And this is sometimes significant expense
even with cooperation and investment.

Thank you very much.

And I hope we will have the opportunity later
on to discuss.

no, thank you very much.

I want to add
Appreciate it.

From your first point, I want to add if you're
taking notes, affordability.

I really took that point.

That North Macedonia is looking at how to
make this project affordable for its citizens.

Otherwise there's really no point.

Thank you very much for that.

Okay.

So, we'll now move to Iraq.

And I would like to ask kindly Dr. AlKhatteeb
to give us his remarks.

Thank you, Linda.

It's always great to be here in Berlin.

Reflecting on the title of the session, Mission
Possible.

I recall five months ago when the prime minister,
felt like designate PM then, asked me to join

the administration.

I was given 10 seconds to say yes or no.

And take my flight and join the cabinet.

It was a, he said, you have the opportunity
to join a mission possible.

And together we can make it possible.

And I think he's right and there are a lot
of opportunities in Iraq to play a pivotal

role not only to sustain its own demand, but
also to support global energy and economic

security at large.

And I'll come to this point.

The first three challenges you mentioned to
mention our top three challenges that any

country could face.

Our country, for example, I would say the
illinformed narrative.

The wrong perception and the legacy mindset
that imposed and governed Iraq for many years.

The and I'll give examples about this.

The illinformed narrative.

It's, for example, when a major delegation
that comes from a very important country to

visit Iraq.

To promote business and attract its own business
community.

Yet at the same time its own embassy issues
a warning on its website to say, don't come

to Iraq.

And it's a red zone as we speak.

The wrong perception is the fact that we are
a rich resource country and its own people

think it's a natural and a national right
to enjoy free electricity, free petrol, free

services.

As if like oil and gas is a something that
is granted to every single country on planet

Earth.

The perception of the business community that
Iraq is a red zone and should not be approached

and life is completely normal and it's a dangerous
place.

All these need changed.

And you would like to use this platform to
issue a message to the international community

that Iraq is open for business.

And Iraq is moving on to improve its conditions.

Yes, it was a it went through a bad time.

It a transnational terrorist group imposed
its war on it to take its toll on all the

infrastructure.

Specifically, on the electricity side which
destroyed literally 2025% of its infrastructure

on that side.

But we have the resources and we have the
capability to move on.

The security of Iraq the economic security
of Iraq is not a local issue, it's a global

issue.

If Iraq is secured, which means 5% of oil
production will continue to pump and sustain

global demand.

This volume of production cannot be replaced
by any spare capacity available today.

And if Iraq's security is compromised, that
means a major crisis will impact on global

security and global economy.

Because no country can afford to pay high
prices, or no investment could sustain its

business on fluctuated market.

So, stability, it's a it's not an Iraqi affairs,
it's a global necessity that everyone should

really think about.

That this country also on track of developing
further capabilities in terms of like oil

production as well as gas.

We've seen earlier in this presentation 
the global demand for energy is on the rise.

And it's currently year on year around 23%.

And mostly from fossil fuel.

Which means oil and gas will remain to be
a key player in the foreseeable future.

On the gas side, the 80% of its of Iraq's
reserves is very much proven reserves is linked

to oil.

It's an associated gas.

But the potential of of unassociated gas are
there.

The country is completely under its support.

And the market condition basically will change
in the coming years.

Because laws and regulations are changing.

Unfortunately, back to the perception and
the wrong narrative.

Or illinformed narrative, should I say.

Is that people think when dictatorship was
removed in 2003, things should happen on a

fast track mode and it should be developed?

We're talking about a country that came out
of half a century of dictatorship, tyranny,

military rule, sanctions, wars, you name it.

This developed generations that they are yet
to change their own mindset to accept the

new worlds.

New market economy.

And the real democracy, not chaotic democracy.

And so within.

And this will require a generation or two,
but progressively speaking.

So, the opportunities are there.

The politics in Iraq is improving.

And it's completely I'm not saying it's a
rosy picture there, but certainly not the

ugly scene that the media and the general
narrative depicting on screen.

It's a place I personally am a senior official
member of the federal government.

And most of the time, other than official
duties, I walk around without security details.

So, I wanted to mention this and highlight
that Iraq is open.

And the size of opportunity for reconstruction
is around $1.5 trillion US.

And this could bail out by a rich resource
country that could finance that in the near

future.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Again, we're seeing a continuing theme from
this morning.

You know, the energy transition, energy is
very much interconnected with political systems,

geopolitics, we're seeing that coming through.

And obviously as the countries are speaking
here, some of their challenges are, you know,

not what you might expect.

I certainly resonate with the idea of travel
advisories as a person living in Kenya.

You know, where thinking, well, we're trying
to move forward.

But, you know, this travel advisory is inconsistent
with some of our goals.

Thank you for those comments.

Now, we do not have much time.

But I still want to give an opportunity to
hear from our last sort of three remaining

panelists that we haven't heard from.

Really, it's just so important that we hear
your challenges, your solutions as well, what

you're doing and then we'll figure out how
we'll tie it all together.

So, over you, China.

Mr. I shouldn't call you that.

Mr. Lin Shanqing.

Thank you.

Thank you, moderator, ladies and gentlemen
and guests.

Firstly, of behalf of China I would like to
introduce myself and what we're doing.

In China, when it comes to the transition,
we have been working very hard and I want

to talk about what we've achieved so far.

I would also like to talk about experiences.

You are all aware that China is an energy
exporter.

But at the same time, it's one of the biggest
consumers worldwide.

So, what we're trying to do in energy policy
is to create reliable energy security.

We're trying to make sure that we have clean
energy and environmentallyfriendly policies.

So, we're trying to we're doing absolutely
everything we can.

We will not cease to endeavor in these areas.

Currently we have 110 gigawatts generator
capacity.

Capacity that we have got rid of dirty power
stations.

So, we've closed that many power stations.

And we've almost completed all of those projects.

At the same time, in the area of Chinese clean
energy, we have a generator capacity of approximately

700 gigawatts that we have installed.

This is the leading figure worldwide.

And I believe that puts China at the forefront
in clean energy.

In our overall energy mix in China, we have
fossil fuel currently we have a share of fossil

fuels that is declining constantly in overall
consumption.

So, the Paris Agreement is very important
to us and we're trying to make our contribution.

Of course, we want to improve our work even
further and to bring things even further.

It's a major challenge for us.

We put lots of challenges coming at us in
the future.

In particular we have seen that implementing
the Paris Climate Agreement is going to mean

enormous amounts of extra work for us.

So, that means that we have got a great deal
of work to do ahead of us.

Signing the Paris Agreement has meant a major
commitment to us and we are always trying

to make sure that we that we fulfill our commitments
that we've made already.

We believe that the peak emissions for us
will be 2030.

However, we very much hope that we're going
to be able to reduce that amount by 6065%.

So, we're not going to leave our commitments.

We're going to do absolutely everything in
our power in order to make sure that we do

achieve these goals.

At the same time, in renewables, we're going
to focus in wind energy and photovoltaic.

We are, again, world leader in installed capacity
in those areas.

However, we are still making efforts in the
area of energy prices and to make sure that

the market's attractive and we are competitive
and that is a trend that increases in the

future.

It's very important worldwide that people
look at China and look at the situation in

China.

We have an eastwest expansion and northsouth
expansion.

A land area, we have around 5,000 kilometers
to cover to go from the top of the country

to the bottom to the east and the west.

So, that means that the heavily burdened areas
are in the east.

But where the energy is actually produced
is very, very far away in the southwest or

the south of China.

So, transferring this energy over vast distances
is a very particular challenge for China as

a country.

When it comes to energy consumption and energy
generation, there's a lot of work for us to

do.

We need to make sure that we adapt prices
as well.

The aim is to also reduce losses in energy
in the grids and in transferring energy.

So, we are taking lots of steps at the moment.

Firstly, we can see that the the commitments
that we have made in the Paris Agreement,

however, we are able to implement them, and
we will continue to do so.

In the area of clean energies, we have about
25% to 30% and we're going to bring that up

to over 50%.

While fossil energy, fossil fuels are going
to be reduced even further.

So, renewable energy for us is mostly wind
and solar energy.

We've had a lot of very positive results so
far.

We've had the products the plants that we've
actually got up and running so far have been

very successful.

Prices from PV are at the same level as conventional
energy sources.

So, for us that is a wonderful report.

And the government will no longer have to
continue to subsidize energy prices from renewables.

That's not the case all across the country.

We still have a lot of work to do to stabilize
and reduce energy prices per kilowatt hour.

The main problem is the production sites are
in the east and we have production sites that

are very far away.

We are very reliant on PV and on wind energy.

We want to make sure that we have a more appropriate
structure for the east and west of China.

And that's a principle that we're currently
working towards.

So, at this point I would just like to say
that we will continue to focus on clean energy,

and we will continue also to focus on reducing
consumption overall.

This is going to be our direction.

We are going to pursue these goals and make
sure that we contribute to efforts worldwide.

That certainly is what we come to mission
possible.

I don't think there's anyone in the room that
doubts that China can do what they set their

minds out to do.

So, thank you very much for your commitment
your recommitment to the Paris Agreement.

Now, before I cede the floor to the next two
speakers to share five minutes, maybe about

nine minutes each, I want to remind the audience
about the Mentimeter.

We want this see your responses to the poll
questions and engage with Twitter.

We're going to have a discussion and close
our session after we have heard your opinion

about what you're hearing on this stage today.

Okay.

Now we will come back to Europe and we will
start with interventions from Turkey.

So, deputy minister Alparslan Bayraktar, will
you kindly take the floor.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

I would like to talk about Turkish energy
transition.

If you look at our energy transition history,
we have two eras.

First, we started like 17 years ago and it
was mainly a market transformation, market

transition.

And what we have done was changing our verticallyintegrated
state monopoly model into a competitive market

model.

And we have unbundled old market activities.

We have decreased the eligibility threshold
every year, deprivatized with state enterprises.

We have applied all necessary tools for market
liberalization.

It wasn't an easy process.

It wasn't so smooth.

Because first we have witnessed a very significant
price increase in our markets due to full

cost reflectivity.

So, lesson number one or challenge number
one.

And main challenges for initial energy transition,
cost reflective pricing.

Secondly, we try to incentivize renewables
in an optimal and more balanced way.

Not to create additional and significant market
distortion.

We have been criticized in Turkey ten years
ago that our renewable support scheme and

figures were very low.

And today still we are being criticized and
people are complaining about the same tariff

figures.

But now they are complaining that these figures
are too high and creating distortion for market

prices.

So, lesson number two, optimal level of support
or incentives for new technologies.

Ten years ago, we were discussing renewable
support scheme.

Now batteries, electric vehicles, demandside
management tools like carbon capture utilization

and storage.

So, we need to be careful on that.

At the end of the first transition period
we believe able to implement successfully

all relevant market reforms.

And during this period, our energy market
attracted more than $60 billion of investment.

Only for power generation assets.

Our wind and solar install capacity went up
to 15.2% from 0%.

IPP's market share, independent power producer's
market share went from 25% to 80%.

And we have a very historic three hours.

April 1st, 2018, in Turkey, 63% of electricity
supply came from renewableonly.

So, it was a great achievement.

Both domestic and foreign investors as well
as financial institutions believed in our

energy market and supported our market reforms.

And in general, they had confidence in our
economy.

And lesson number three, or challenge number
three, political will and commitment as well

as longterm vision on energy policy are key
for successful energy transition.

So, Turkey completed this first phase of its
energy market transition which I call it transition

1.0.

And in 2017, two years ago, we announced a
new energy and mining policy.

I call it transition 2.0.

It has three main pillars.

Security of supply, optimal utilization of
local resources, mainly renewables, and, of

course, market predictability.

It was the most comprehensive and most integrated
energy policy documented in Turkish history.

It includes many macro-economic and social
policy aspects.

Job creation, manufacturing, R&D and energy,
business opportunities for small and mediumsize

enterprises.

These were all addressed in this policy document.

And we have very ambitious renewable targets.

Over the next ten years we would like to add
10 gigawatts of solar and 10 gigawatts of

wind into our energy mix.

Also, in 2018, it was very historic again,
our government announced energy efficiency

action plan.

It includes different sectors from energy
to buildings, transportation, agriculture,

industry and many crosscutting sectors with
55 different actions.

And we would like to aim to attract investment
to energy efficiency area roughly $11 billion

over the next 56 years.

In the meantime, the aim is to reduce our
primary energy consumption by 14% and hopefully

we will reduce also 66 million tons of carbon
emissions.

I can continue, but maybe for the solutions
part in the second round, I will touch upon

our solutions.

Thank you very much, sir.

Excellent.

Let's now have introductory remarks from the
state secretary on energy in Portugal.

Hi, good afternoon to you all.

I would like to thank the German federation
for the invitation to this event.

Luckily, I was the last one to speak, because
it allows me to contrast my country's experience

with the previous interventions.

And luckily, I am from a small country with
no geopolitical problems.

That doesn't have that doesn't produce oil
or gas, so we don't have second thoughts on

whether this renewable thing is a good idea
or not.

We don't have an option.

And we are fully integrated in the European
Union, fully integrated with its policy priorities.

And we start all of this with almost 60% already
in our electricity production coming from

renewable resources.

I would say in comparison that we have an
easy life compared to previous interventions

on this panel.

What we're doing in Portugal at the moment
is that we've approved in line with the other

European Union members.

The climate and energy plan.

And we have tried to organize our energy transition.

First with the main strategic goals and with
the energy and with a climate and energy plan.

And then that plan is fully integrated with
TSO and DSO's investment plans in order for

them to plan the development in accordance
with the goals and the strategic objectives

of the climate and energy plan.

And afterwards, and now I'm talking just about
solar, we in line with taking into account

the goals and the investment plans of the
DSO and the TSO will auction the available

capacity coming out of those same investment
plans.

And we'll do auctions until we fulfill our
goals presented in the climate and energy

plan.

The main challenge for now for Portugal is
this.

We are in a very weird situation because we
are one of the countries in Europe with the

highest solar potential.

And we are probably one of the countries in
Europe with the lowest installed capacity

of solar.

We have twice as much sun as Germany and we
have only 500, 600 megawatts of solar.

This compares with 7,000 megawatts of hydro
and 6,000 megawatts of wind.

So, we have a long way to go in solar.

The good news is that we have the resources.

And we just have to, well, we just have to
start with the auctions which we'll do starting

this June.

We'll do two regular options per year in line
with the objectives in the climate and energy

plan.

The main challenge apart from increasing renewable
capacity in line with those objectives is,

of course, to prepare the grid for intermittent
renewable resources.

We have a great experience in that because
we have had many, many, many days of above

100% of renewable energy in our grid.

So, we have the experience and now we're just
actually adding more solar.

And the biggest challenge is after we've added,
or during the process of adding solar to our

energy mix which already includes a lot of
hydro and wind, it's to provide flexibility

to the grid which we are actually doing right
now.

We want to regulate storage because it's not
regulated in Portugal.

We are allowing storage right now for the
solar options.

You can include storage in the projects.

So, this is basically what you're doing.

Increasing capacity, guaranteeing that the
grid will be able to accommodate these increased

percentages of intermittent renewable power
sources.

We want to do an option next year just for
storage.

But I think starting from where we are starting
with already 60% 57% of renewables in total

electricity production, I think we have the
skills and the experience to make the impossible

possible.

Oh, wonderful.

great finish.

Thank you very much.

So, we've heard a diversity of challenges.

And a diversity of experiences from our panelists
here.

And one of the themes that I was getting is
depending on where you are in the geopolitical

maps, your challenges tend to be, you know,
definitely quite different and contrasted.

So, that's sort of what we prepared for you
from our panelists.

But we really want to hear what you're thinking.

And to help me have a discussion on that,
I would like to invite my colleague, Mr. Dialogue,

who will reflect back what it is that you're
seeing on Twitter.

What is it that you're seeing on the poll?

And then I'll ask the panelists to react specifically
to some of the key things that Mr. Dialogue

is going to point out.

And then we'll do a lightning round of 30
seconds.

You close out anything you didn't get a chance
to say.

You literally have 30 seconds before we have
to go to the next session.

Okay.

Thank you, Linda.

This is your last chance to take part in the
three questions.

Please point your devices in that direction
if you haven't done so already.

I would also like to start off with a couple
of Tweets just because we are now at the point

in the conference when a number of things
are happening outside of this room.

There are competing sessions.

But there is also, for instance, if we can
get this up on the wall.

For instance, the foreign office where we're
sitting right now has just Tweeted that they

are meeting with the representatives of the
Maldives to talk about the security implications

of climate change.

So, meetings like that are also going on in
the background.

Another one of the sessions that's going on
turned out to be an allwoman panel, an allfemale

panel.

And that was very much appreciated.

We they specifically spoke about here we have,
for instance, a German magazine.

And they are specifically talking about I
don't have that over here on the screen there.

Beyond electricity.

Making the transition work in all sectors.

So, there are interesting discussions going
on outside there as well.

There's another good news source for what's
happening in Germany.

It's called clean energy wire.

And we have some of their representatives
also walking around talking to interesting

people with some interesting discussions there
that they're reporting on.

So, you can also use Twitter to see what else
is happening outside of this room.

Now, I need the little clicker here and we'll
move over to the Menti poll if we can get

that up.

All right.

So, let's see what the biggest challenges
for the energy transition are.

And that turns out to be political will.

And this was also something that I saw from
Twitter that someone else was claiming on

one of the panels.

That political will is the biggest optical.

Obstacle.

Do you feel that your country is on a good
path with the energy transition?

And we have overwhelming agreement that we
still have our work cut out for us.

At least we accept the facts.

We could put it that way.

And in which energy sector do you see the
most need?

It turns out to be transport.

That's the great consensus here.

I personally would have said heat.

But okay.

We could talk about it.

I'll hand it back over to Linda now and we
can go through with the final comments from

the panel.

Thank you.

Appreciate that.

Thanks very much.

Thanks for participating.

We definitely want to see the number of participants
go up.

I think we're about 6070 of us participating.

So, the more of your opinions we can get,
the better the sample size across.

So, ladies and gentlemen, first and foremost,
as you give your closing remarks.

Do you agree with certainly the first one?

Whether it's a political will.

Do you agree that transportation in your respective
country is where we need to be spending the

most time?

Right?

So, if you can react so what has been said.

But certainly, give us your parting shots,
your closing remarks.

Again, we only have maybe 30 seconds per speaker.

So, who would like to start?

How about I give I give the opportunity to
somebody with a burning comment.

Ladies first.

Okay.

I think you have been volunteered, Minister
Suarez.

Okay, well, regarding political will.

I will say part of the challenges we have
as policy makers is making sure that we can

innovate at the same time that we are predictable.

Because we then have a private sector that
is invested in the electricity sector.

That is definitely a challenge to keep the
pace.

We do have the political will, but definitely
we can be more aggressive in terms of the

goals that we could achieve due to opportunities
that we have.

Thank you very much.

Keeping it short and sharp.

Okay.

Next, who would like to go after Minister
Suarez?

I'm gonna ask the representative from Turkey.

Not Portugal, Turkey.

Thank you.

In energy transition, there's no one size
fits all.

Yes, I agree with the political will and commitment
is a key success factor here.

But every country as you said also in your
speech, every country that is their own specifics.

Their own challenges and their own capabilities
and opportunities.

So, we need to respect all these differences.

The longterm vision, more integrated policy.

And, of course, the country's adaptive capacity
are crucially important.

But one thing I think we haven't discussed
in here, that inclusiveness and consumer empowerment,

engagement with the citizens also quite crucial
for energy transition.

Last but not least, continue on market reforms.

More innovation and out of box thinking.

Or in other words, like mindsets change as
was mentioned in the opening remarks are all

stakeholders that are key for having a better
energy future.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Yes, sir, from Turkey.

From Portugal.

Beg your pardon.

I agree that political will is most important.

And I would add that's what's most disruptive
is not technology.

It's politics.

It's politics that sets the goal.

It's politics that needs to be persistent
and needs to mobilize all the efforts.

What's really disruptive more than technology
is politics because we need a new type of

politics but with an old ingredient that we
cannot let go.

Which is politics needs to show to the citizens
this is an opportunity, not a threat, not

a concern.

But an opportunity that will not threaten
their lifestyle.

But dot opposite, actually.

Provides all our citizens with new opportunities.

And this is really an economic and labor opportunity
for all.

I would say that is the most crucial side
and the most disruptive also.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Short and sharp.

Yes, sir?

Okay.

First of all, I agree that political wish
is something crucial.

And I said also in my previous discussion
that political wish means how the government

can secure environment for financing and find
a way how to make the project feasible for

an investor.

And also, not to have the big impact to the
price of electricity for the final customer.

This is what the government must secure.

But I don't believe in the government of investments.

I believe in private investment in this area.

And because this investment created the liquid
market, liberalized market, this is my suggestion.

And any energy transition in any country doesn't
exist or received all over the world.

It's a tailormade solution for any country.

This is very important.

And also, I don't agree with the second column
that transportation is I can say with the

biggest potential for reduction.

For the I can say renewable energy.

Maybe for climate change.

For the reduction of climate changes.

But what means if we can change the vehicles.

The engine vehicles with electric vehicles.

If we charge the vehicles with the electricity
from the thermal power plants or coal.

What's the potential here?

Here the ratio is more than 50%, but here
only 32%.

We have a situation.

We have to take into consideration this.

Yes, in the vehicle with electrical vehicle.

But charged bit renewable energies.

That is all.

Thanks.

That's a good point.

Yep.

Yes.

Any other interventions?

Sir, go on.

My opinion is that the energy transition is,
of course, very important and that political

will is essential.

But nevertheless, I think that it's important
that the economy and also science need to

play a very important role.

And this is happening in different ways.

So, new technologies, for instance, need to
be adopted.

For instance, this is the case for hydrogen.

So, this is really something that will be
a breakthrough technology.

And this is essential.

I agree.

Okay.

Dr. AlKhatteeb, do you want to give your remarks?

Yeah, thank you.

I couldn't agree more on the political will.

I think in the context of Iraq, being surrounded
by six countries either consumers, producer

or transit countries, when it comes to the
energy play, certainly the energy transition

requires the collective effort and cooperation
with all partners.

With the right commercial coalition, I think
not only Iraq could rebuild itself, but the

region could be transformed into a vibrant
energy hub and a region for peace as opposed

to a region of wars and troubles.

Thank you.

Yep.

And then I kindly ask for prime minister,
if you have some final words that you want

to share with the conference?

First of all, I would like to say that unfortunately
we cannot discuss other questions until we

resolve the question of energy supply.

Until we have sufficient energy.

That is, we are faced with an issue that we
will not have gas ending soon.

And at the same time, we cannot say that everyone
has the same level of understanding for this

issue.

Now, in the same line, whether we will use
new technologies, whether we will use new

energy sources depends on economic development
of the country.

You know, earlier, in the past, the most impoverished
layers of people ate black bread and the richest

parts of the population would eat white bread.

Today, at least in Serbia, this is this was
the case.

Today, rich people eat the black bread because
it's healthier.

And the poorer eat the white bread.

This may be more delicious, more tasty.

But it is not healthier.

This is why this has all been directed towards
rich countries.

What you have earned in the market of less
developed countries you can use now to help

these countries advance that the technology
be advanced so that we can all have equal

conditions to live in a healthy environment.

As a politician I welcome you all.

I'm not a minister of energy.

But without energy, we already have a political
crisis.

Thank you very much.

Ladies and gentlemen, we started our session
with miss Faustine setting the stage.

And it's only fitting that we allow her to
give the final remarks.

What I wanted to conclude on is this is mission
possible.

Technologically this is possible.

We have solutions in every sectors including
in the harder to abate sectors, heavy industry,

heavy duty transport.

But this is only feasible if we have political
will.

And it was very encouraging to hear on this
panel, the amount of political will, especially

from China, from the European Union and European
countries.

This is essential.

We need to remember this is an industrial
revolution in front of us.

Like any industrial revolution, it will create
disruptions.

But it will also create a huge amount of economic
opportunities and I wanted to finish on that

note.

Thank you very much.


