What framework is needed to trigger investments
in the integrated energy transition?

The Paris Agreement has set the world on a
path to meet our well below 2 degrees Celsius

rise in temperature.

To meet this goal, investments into the energy
transition of roughly $3.57 trillion a year

are needed.

Fossil fuel subsidies amount to considerably
more.

We start with fossil fuels.

Okay.

Libby Wayman.

Libby Wayman is from breakthrough Ventures.

We will talk about that, but now a short introduction
as a kickoff to this session.

Libby, please.

Good morning.

Climate change represents the greatest challenge
of our time.

And today we're at the dawn of a global transition
to a clean economy.

In the electricity sector, after decades of
investment in cleaner technology, R&D and

deployment, renewable energy technologies
are now costcompetitive without subsidies.

In the last few years, we've reached an important
milestone.

Where over half of the new generation technology
added to the grid is renewable energy.

This represents over $300 billion in annual
investment since around 2011.

But this is just the start.

Around 100 gigawatts of solar were added in
the last year.

Around over 50 gigawatts of wind and beyond.

Yet we're adding these renewable energy technologies
to a grid with about 6 terawatt of energy

generation capacity.

We're just scratching the surface both in
the installed base and relative to the trillions

of dollars of investment that this opportunity
represents.

And we also must look beyond the electricity
sector.

In the last year, less than 1% of global sales
of vehicles were electric vehicles.

Even out to 2040- and 2050-time frame, it's
anticipated that electric vehicle sales will

account for 3550% of new vehicle sales.

Some estimates even project that more internal
combustion engine vehicles will be on the

road in 2040 and 2050 than there are today.

Beyond transportation and electricity, if
we think about the buildings that we live in.

If we reduce energy consumption in buildings
by 20%, that represents over 2 gigatons of

CO2 reduction.

And in manufacturing, only three sectors of
manufacturing make up 5 gigatons of annual

emissions.

Concrete, steel and chemicals.

And across the whole manufacturing sector,
it's around 15 gigatons.

But beyond electricity generation and energy
consumption, we also have to think about the

food on our tables and the agricultural industry
that brings it there.

If cows were a country, just cows, just annual
dairy and beef production, that would represent

the emissions of basically the third largest
over the third largest nation.

The five largest food producers in the world
are responsible for emissions that are equivalent

to the largest independent oil and gas company.

So, we have a lot of work to do.

And the electricity sector, I think, is a
very promising start.

But it's just a start.

Innovators from entrepreneurs, business leaders
around the world, need to continue their efforts

in scientific technologies, breakthroughs
in technologies and business models that can

generate both business model innovation and
cost competitive technologies in these sectors

across the economy.

The public sector and the private sector have
a role to play.

And I look forward to discussing that on the
panel.

Thanks very much, Libby.

That lays out the big picture with some sobering
facts.

We also heard yesterday from Fatih Birol that
the challenge ahead of us is quite immense.

And so, maybe we can get some good ideas going
among you on how we can move that forward.

Libby, I'll start with you since you just
gave that presentation.

You are an investment partner with Breakthrough
Ventures.

It's an investorled fund that focuses on new
energy technologies.

Maybe not just energy technologies and venture
capital funds.

And you, like I think everyone on the panel
has both public and private sector experience.

You served as global director of GE's Ecoimagination
innovation.

Which I think invests 20 billion in clean
innovation.

And you in between roles you worked for the
US State Department as a founding director

of the clean energy manufacturing initiative.

So, your insights from both with your public
and your private hat will be very valuable.

Then to you, Nataliya Boyko.

You're deputy minister of European integration
and the ministry of coal and energy of Ukraine.

Before that you worked as energy reform manager
on the National Council for Reforms chaired

by the President of Ukraine.

We would like to hear about how the Ukraine
and how you were collaborating.

And I don't want to be remiss and not mention
that Nataliya Boyko was in 2017 was among

the top 30 under 30, a prize awarded by the
Kiev post, of young Ukrainians with outstanding

results in sectors.

Congratulations to you on that.

Then I'll go to Mr. Thabane Zulu.

Director general, Department of Energy from
the Republic of South Africa.

You have been in that post since 2015.

And before that you were director general
of the Department of Human settlements.

And before that, executive director of business
development at African Access.

And you too have the public and the private
experience.

And you also, and I really want to get into
this later, you worked for the South African

local government association.

And you told me before you were also municipal
manager.

So, I hope we get to touch on the experience
from the local government perspective and

what needs to be done there.

And then finally Mr. Andrew McDowell.

Vice President of the European Investment
Bank which you joined in 2016.

Responsible for energy and agriculture lending
and economic relations with ten European and

15 Asian countries.

And you're the first Irish manager of the
bank's committee.

And economic adviser to the prime minister
of Ireland.

And the EIB, being the world's largest multilateral
lender and largest provider of climaterelated

investment.

We're very, very happy and honored to of you
join us today on this session.

So, with those introductions, we could get
going.

But before we do that, I'm going to invite
Mr. Dialogue on to the stage whom I know

is Mr. Craig Morris.

But today he's and yesterday he's Mr.Dialogue.

Craig, what can you tell us about the Twitter
activity?

Well, first of all, we have the hashtag that
I would like you to use.

And if we can get the QR code up once again.

There's a different code for every question
at Mentimeter.

Point your device in that direction.

If you can't did that with a laptop or something,
enter the URL and the code.

Some people were telling me yesterday at the
end of the event, Craig, you're being kind

of polite here, aren't you?

Are there some more critical Tweets out there?

Okay.

Maybe I was being a little bit polite because
we had all the ministers and the important

people here.

But today, it's the second day of the conference.

And it's just us, right?

We're all friends.

So, we can speak more openly.

I had one Tweet that came in after I presented
the results yesterday.

The last time I was on stage that I thought
was wonderful.

We had asked the audience; would you be willing
to pay for more a coal exit?

And someone wrote in and said, come on.

You're more enlightened than this.

Why are you equating a coal exit with higher
costs?

And I thought, that's a good question to talk
about.

But it was too late.

Because I had already left the stage.

So, here's the thing.

I need you to go there now.

Take a look at the questions.

And go ahead and start firing off some things
using this hashtag because I'm monitoring

that account, that hashtag.

And then I will come up here and we can bounce
some of your questions and criticism off of

what the panel has been saying as well, okay?

That's the whole idea.

So, I'll be back in a half hour or so.

Enjoy the presentation.

Virginia, I'm handing off to you.

Thank you.

Thank you, Craig.

Thank you, Mr. Dialogue.

We'll look forward to getting that feedback.

Nataliya Boyko, may I call you Nataliya?

Of course.

Tell us what changes are taking place in the
energy sector in terms of the energy transition?

Thank you very much.

Does it work?

Okay.

Perfect.

Probably now is the most challenging and changing
period in Ukraine's energy sector ever.

Because currently we have different challenges
that are connecting with our political situation

and Ukraine was choosing five years ago, that
means Euro integration.

But at the same time, we're trying to achieve
all important goals that the other countries

are challenging now.

We were in a top ten countries who adopted
the Paris Agreement.

And it was ratified in the Ukraine.

We are working now on the joint agenda for
energy and environmental sectors.

What I think is important.

And we understand that organization is the
key answer on future development.

But let me start from five years ago.

Five years ago, we started the new agenda
for Ukraine, and Ukrainians choose the Euro

integration as a main important way for our
country.

And in the energy sector, that was extremely
complicated because Ukraine was always connecting

to the source base and the roads base in the
energy sector with the Russian Federation.

And the new strategy for the country was to
change the course and to choose all important

energy independence measures to achieve the
Euro integration.

So, what we are doing now.

Currently we are finalizing implementation
of the first energy package.

We need to create the market relations on
the bulk market, electricity and gas market

in Ukraine and to have the same regulation
at Europe in countries.

At the same time, we choose the very strong
priority.

We are making the integration of the both
of the markets from the infrastructure perspective

to Europeans.

That's why we have a very strong very strong
reform that is connecting with integration

with Europe in our gas sphere and electricity
sphere.

But that's the base.

To achieve the future goals and to start to
work with important tasks, first we need to

make the bases sync.

Task number one is resilience of our system.

And here achieving goals connecting with energy
independence and energy security because,

for example, when we're talking about energy
security in Ukraine, we have also such a question

as in cybersecurity.

At least one per year we have a huge cyber
attack on our critical infrastructure in the

energy sector.

That's also connecting with a complicated
geopolitical situation.

But what's interesting is we are trying to
achieve important goals, for example, with

increasing of renewables.

We have operated the ambitious target to achieve
11% by 2020.

But what does it mean for the oldfashioned
postsoviet energy system?

When you're talking about electricity system,
we are covering now around 55% with the nuclear

generation.

We have a huge consumption of in the coal
sector.

We have not very high percent of big hydrogen
generation.

And we are growing daybyday, yearbyyear, our
renewable sector that is now supported with

a very high tariff system.

But for the energy system, that means that
we need the balancing capacities.

Because currently in the Ukraine we have such
a paradox that we are increasing renewables.

We are proud on that; we are very green.

Feel very good.

At the same time, we are increasing coal consumption
to balance the renewables for the system.

And we are shocked.

Because currently we understand that in the
future, we will probably use more storage

technologies.

We will develop different technologies for
the balancing of the system.

We are trying to develop the smart grid technologies
for the networks.

But actually, now the benefit of greens looks
not very beneficial for that target that we

are trying to achieve.

So, we start to analyze how the growing of
renewables is impacting on resilience in our

system.

On our network situation, of our current generation
sources, et cetera, et cetera.

And we have a couple of answers.

First answer is decentralization.

So, I think in the future that possible smaller
generation, also renewable generation for

the locals will be very beneficial.

And for the general system we need to develop
the current we need to develop the ability

to support the small, decentralized generation.

The second answer is, of course, we had probably
develop the big hydro more.

Because on the one hand, of course, we know
that we need to be very careful with environmental

impact assessment.

But still we are not allowed to increase the
coal consumption.

And one more important thing, what we need
to achieve is, of course, to even to currently

use of coal consumption of coal need to be
clean.

And here the final answer on these questions
is investment and financing.

In the Ukraine we have a lot of investors
who are working with solar and wind.

We have a high tariff system.

From time to time we are providing better
programs as, for example, EBRD.

So, our bank has like a green line credit
for solar and biogas.

And they are more beneficial and cheaper as
we progress.

Here we have growing projects.

But at the same time that doesn't answer the
question of the balancing capacities.

The situation with gas is a bit complicated.

So, to build new balancing generation, for
example, gas pump generation, we need to find

investment and any bank in the Ukraine and
international bank don't like to make any

like beneficial line for the balancing capacities.

The only discussion that we have with Ukraine
banks and the world banks is about support

of big hydro.

That's the line they are ready to support.

So, we are challenging different questions.

But at the same time, I think that important
thing is that we all need to have a very concrete

point from the low carbon development points.

And stepbystep to work on that agenda.

Thanks very much for that.

11% renewables by 2020.

Yes.

That's like tomorrow.

A brief comment.

Here we have one complicated thing.

The target was pointed when we were with the
whole independence Ukrainian territories.

Crimea was annexed by Russians and we lost
solar generation there, we lost energy infrastructure,

we lost capacity there.

East is also under the conflict with the Russians
and we lost capacity there, especially closer

to the sunny regions.

Politically it's incorrectly now to put new
targets.

I think that we need to still to keep the
line that we are the unique country and we

need to achieve our targets.

But, yes, geopolitical situation undercut
our ambitious plans.

Yes.

So, stay ambitious.

Need that.

And you've Ukraine's joined IRENA, hasn't
it?

Yes.

And we are pretty active.

Very good.

Thanks very much, Nataliya.

Let me move to Thabane Zulu from South Africa.

Because some things are similar.

We have a lot of coal.

And paint out the picture that you have in
South Africa right now for us, Thabane.

Thank you very much, Virginia.

Ministers, deputy ministers, ambassadors and
also my ambassador present, thanks very much

for gracing us with your presence.

From a South African perspective, I think
one could indicate that we have a population

of 55 million people.

And I'm sure that the majority of you will
know that from 1994 South Africa began a new

journey of a democratic dispensation that
changed the landscape politically and economically

of how the country wanted to move forward.

And obviously energy is one area that our
government had to pay special attention in

terms of managing a new perspective to deal
with the new challenges that the country was

faced with.

It then gave us an opportunity to look into
our integrated resource plan which our government

adopted a new energy mix policy in 2008.

And in 2010, our government introduced a new
IRP plan which was reflecting on our energy

mix as a purpose for government.

Historically has come our utility has always
played a very dominant role in our industry

for the supply of electricity generation.

Using our national, which is coal.

And coal is one of the most influencing production
of electricity in our country through the

utility of Eskom.

With the introduction of our integrated resource
plan in 2010, we are basically reflecting

on the energy mix that the government wanted
to forecast.

It changed the whole strategy of providing
electricity generation in our country which

was a very exciting process that government
adopted.

However, that did not come without challenges
as you will know.

And it's also important to indicate that South
Africa is a signatory of the Paris Climate

agreement.

And one of the reasons why we had to look
into the energy mix was to create a space

for the use of renewables as one alternative
or subline of electricity in our country.

That was new game changer in our environment.

This is something that has never been done
before.

And the government decided to introduce independent
power producers office which was an office

that was tasked with the responsibility of
introducing renewables in our country.

You can then imagine the excitement and the
challenges that brought into our country.

And what was very interesting is that international
community, in particular those with various

technologies started to play special attention
in our industry.

In the renewable space.

But obviously Eskom, as a standard practice,
had to review its own strategy of competing

with the new approach of introducing renewables.

And that on its own has always been a challenge.

It remains a challenge.

It's very interesting, though, that our independent
power producer's office was able to attract

huge investments from international community.

Particularly companies that had different
technologies in the renewable space such as

wind, such as solar.

And one can also indicate that in that process
we were able to attract investment in our

country of 195 billion range.

56 billion US dollars in our industry of renewables.

And this was one of the strategic areas in
our integrated resource plan to begin to create

a space for renewables in our industry.

This was one of the key procurement strategies
that we put in place.

And what was interesting is how the international
community responded in this particular investment

area in terms of the financing strategies.

Of course, that did not come without challenges.

As you know that South Africa has never been
involved in this place before.

And also, the technologies that were being
brought into our space were not of original

nature.

So, they were transferred from those countries.

So, the challenges were mainly around this
transfer, the financing model and the localization

content strategy.

How to make sure you accommodate the local
content without necessarily shifting the investments

away.

And how also to comply with the conditions,
financial conditions, that some of the investors,

they were imposing in our local space.

And that was, for us, a big challenge.

But be that as it may, what is interesting
is that we're able to put a strategy for the

role of the local players, for the role of
the international investors and for the role

of the technologies that were being brought
about into our space.

As we speak today, in our national creed,
since we started in 2010, we have 6400 megawatts

that has been brought into our national grid
in the renewable space.

It does two things.

It is on our national grid, but it also makes
us to comply with our commitment we have made

in the Paris Agreement for climate change
as we use renewables.

So, that was our great achievement that we
have made.

And it's really revisiting currently our integrated
resource plan, we have no doubt whatsoever

that renewables will continue to play a very
important strategic role in the supply of

our generation.

And we look forward to the finalization of
that process and to attract more investment

in the space and relax the challenge that
our national grid is faced with at the moment.

Now in South Africa you have load sharing.

It's because our grid is faced with a demand
that it cannot supply.

And our savior, therefore, is renewables.

Thank you.

That deserves an applause.

Congratulations on that.

And we'll talk more about those challenges
when we get into the detail of that.

But now we go to the finance side of the panel.

And we start with you, Andrew McDowell.

Given that the public sector isn't going to
be able to foot the bill, as we say, to provide

the financing that's needed.

How can the public sector, then, what's their
role in directing finance in that capital

steerage towards the energy 16 energy transition?

Not just in renewables, but in the whole space.

Thank you, Virginia.

Good to be in Berlin.

A brief introduction to the European investment
bank.

We're the EU bank.

Owned by the still 28 member states of the
European Union.

And we're six years old.

We finance our while the capital, the initial
capital comes from the member states, we finance

ourselves in the global capital markets.

So, we're not we don't take taxpayers'
money every year.

We raise our bonds every year.

Over six years we've become the largest multilateral
financing institution in the world.

We have a sheet of about 600 billion.

We're about twice the size of the World bank.

Most of that financing, about 90% into the
European Union its.

Financing infrastructure, innovation, SMEs
and so on.

But about 10%, and in fact an increasing proportion
goes outside of the European Union, in South

Africa and Ukraine.

We have built up a huge energy business.

So, energy is about 20% of our business.

Energy financing.

Mainly renewable energy and energy efficiency
is about twothirds of the energy business.

We do about 1214 billion of energy projects
off our own balance sheet every year.

With most of that as I say, about 80% of that,
is renewable energies, wind and solar, energy

efficiency.

So, it's clean energy.

And then we do obviously networks also.

Both power and gas.

And then we do a little bit of thermal generation.

Not much anymore.

But we do a little bit of gasfired generation.

We haven't touched coal in about 15, 20 years.

We're very proud of our role in the energy
transformation.

I mean, we pioneered green bonds.

We were the first ever issuer of green bonds
in 2007 when our climate awareness bond.

We're still the largest issuer of green bonds
in the world and really, we feel we have set

the standard for green bond issuing.

We pioneered the offshore wind in Europe.

About 40% is funded by the EIB.

And we set how to structure and prepare a
wind projects.

Now the private sector is obviously taking
over the job and relieving us of our requirement

to finance it.

We really do regard ourselves as the EU's
climate bank.

For this reason, many of you may have seen
President Macron wrote about the elections.

Setting the terms for further integration
among the member states and set us the division

for the creation of an EU climate bank.

And we want to be the institution that delivers
on that vision of the EU's climate bank.

As I've said, we've done an awful lot.

But there's a lot of areas where we need to
improve.

We need to do an awful lot more.

And that's why we're actually reviewing our
energy lending policies at the moment in the

light of the new commitments that have been
made bit European Commission and the European

Union under the Paris climate agreement.

The new agreement for net zero carbon emissions
by 2050.

We are consults on our energy lending policies
how to achieve that vision.

Some of the questions you're asking yourself
are the ones you're asking me now, when you

look at the investment requirements in the
EU alone over this period, over 400 billion

a year in the 2020s, rising further in the
2030s to get to a place of net zero emissions

by 2050.

How do we fill that gap?

Half of that is going to be in energy efficiency.

Half of that investment requirement.

I mean, we're doing about 4 billion a year
in energy efficiency.

Financing projects of about 10 billion a year.

That's fine.

But the gap is enormous.

How do we crowd in others?

How to get promoters to do better projects
to crowd in the private sector?

How to get the asset class that brings in
the $10 trillion in asset managers into this

asset class?

How to fill the gap in risk capital for deploying
of new technologies?

It's a huge issue.

Particularly in Europe.

Also, in the United States, but particularly
in Europe.

And we're looking forward to working with
partners in this particular challenge because

VC, traditional VC does not do energy tech
commercialization and deployment.

When it takes ten years to go from, you know,
demonstration to full deployment, you're not

going to get a lot of VC into that type of
market.

We need a new model and to work with new partners
to develop a model to fill that gap.

How do we finance renewables when it's shifting
the market risk?

This is a huge challenge.

If we have to triple, quadruple, potentially,
renewable in Europe, but the states are pulling

back, how do you do that on the merchant basis?

We are working with the financial and merchant
industry how to set the standard for those

projects.

Outside of Europe, we want to really increase
our presence in terms of renewable energy

generation.

We think Europe has been a leader in a lot
of market.

We want to bring that experience in project,
preparation and finance to our partner countries

all over the world.

And in doing so, crowding in other private
sector finances.

Because this is the big challenge, particularly
outside of Europe.

So, we are developing new products outside
of Europe in terms of political risk guarantees.

New guaranteed products for takers in terms
of removing offtake risk for renewable power

generators.

We're working with the World Bank, working
with the IFC, with the EBRD in those markets

that we share a common jurisdiction to find
new ways for renewable energy this those countries.

But the challenge is immense.

There's a lot of individual institutions.

But we need to work together as a system in
order to try to mobilize the amounts of capital

that are going to be required.

Thank you.

You said 400 billion per year?

Just in Europe, yeah.

For
That almost sounds like, compared to the trillions

and bazillions that we're hearing, that almost
sounds Manageable.

I wanted to get back on the energy efficiency.

Because energy efficiency has always been
considered the easiest, you know, no brainer,

lowhanging fruit.

Also, in all the climate negotiations going
way back.

It was always energy efficiency.

That's doable.

But we're, Fatih Birol said yesterday it's
far too low.

Too weak.

You're saying the investments in energy efficiency
need to be worked on.

Do you have sort of a strategy you think that
could trigger this off?

Yeah.

So, okay.

Delighted you asked me that because we're
actually working on this with Fatih Birol.

We set up with the IEA a new MDB energy efficiency
platform where all the MDBs, the World Bank�the

I Islamic development.

But all the major MDBs are coming together
to look at common standards with end products

and instruments when it comes to energy efficiency
financing.

For our part, there's a number we are prioritizing.

First, we want to develop a much bigger energy
performance contracting market in Europe.

There's a whole range of issues including
statistical treatment under government accounting

of performance contracts.

The United States is a market about ten times
the size of Europe when it comes to ESCOs

and EPCs.

That's a big challenge.

We're working on that.

We want to develop green mortgages as an asset
class.

We're working with the private banks on this.

And we have a whole network now of about 30
private banks who are looking at the standard.

The standard required for green mortgages.

What makes a mortgage a green mortgage in
terms of the level of energy efficiency improvements

required?

We would love to develop an asset class.

In other words, we would love to develop the
first securitized European green mortgage

to bring in asset managers into this particular
area.

We want to work with local authorities in
the public sector.

Particularly in terms of the preparation of
projects for the public sector, not just energy

performance contracts, but generally.

We have a hundred million for technical instance
and financial structure we can bring to the

European public sector, to municipalities
across Europe.

We have great stories in Romania, for example.

We've financed the retro fit of about 200,000
apartments in Bucharest to bring them to the

highest standards.

But we need to do this in a lot more jurisdictions.

So, energy efficiency, I think, is going to
be the one nut we really have to crack if

we're going to meet the targets that have
been set under the Paris Accords.

Thanks very much.

Move from the bank to the venture capital
sector.

We would like to hear about your the fund
that you're partnering in and, yep, the work

you're doing both in the US and outside of
the US.

Yes, absolutely.

And Breakthrough energy is excited to be here.

Thank you, dignitaries and ministers, for
having us.

Breakthrough energy is an initiative led by
Bill Gates and several other global business

leaders who are entrepreneurs and industry
leaders themselves.

And also, a number of corporations and a number
of governments around the world.

Breakthrough Energy Ventures is the investment
venture arm of that.

And it is over a $1 billion venture fund that
is invested in by some of our coalition members.

So, some of the largest entrepreneurs and
business leaders around the world.

And we invest in any innovation across the
entire economy that can make a significant

reduction in carbon emissions while also representing
the possibility to become a large and profitable

business that defines the future of the economy.

And then thereby represents an important investment
opportunity for us as a fund.

Part of our thesis here is that if we and
other investors that we work with can continue

to invest in this sector and demonstrate toptier
venture returns compared to all other venture

funds, that we will attract additional capital
to this sector and open up the opportunity

to bring in the trillions of dollars that
are needed not only in innovation, but then

in deployment through these other mechanisms.

We're also a 20year fund.

So, we have the timeline to invest in early
stage technologies and take them through several

years of derisking and development to enable
them to be ready for deployment.

We also, most of us are located in the US.

However, we invest globally.

We are a global fund.

We've made investments in the US, Canada,
Australia, sub Saharan Africa, Europe and

we are just getting started.

We just started deploying capital in 2018.

We are looking at many other regions around
the world.

And then we're also working with other regions
around the world in a publicprivate partnership

sort of model.

Earlier this fall we actually announced a
joint fund with the European Commission led

by the investment bank for 100 million Euro
joint fund to be invested here in Europe as

well.

And so, we see our role as finding really
dedicated entrepreneurs who are committed

to solving some of the toughest challenges
on our planet.

And helping them build companies, develop
innovations and technologies and business

models and get them into market.

And then, we work with other partners to help
deploy these technologies in different markets

around the world.

Very good.

Thanks very much, Libby.

so, you'll be looking to leverage to leverage
that fund as you proceed in with the public

funding as well.

So, that's
Absolutely.

Good model.

With that, the end of the first round, I will
ask Mr.Dialogue to come back on to the stage

and tell us what he's been hearing or reading.

Maybe we can get the results up for the Menti
questions.

Very good participation.

I think more than 80 people who participated,
and we've actually got so many good questions,

20 at least, I'm only going to be able to
handle about five or six of them.

Oh, I forgot my little flicker there.

Maybe I can get that as well.

The first question was, what will trigger
investments in the energy transition?

And the answer that you say is: A price on
carbon.

And we have an interesting question in line
with that, but I'll come back to this in just

a minute.

To accelerate the transition to renewables,
governments should focus on policies that

increase returns, carbon tax prices and subsidies.

Back to the carbon price.

Some of you are still participating I can
see.

And the effects of the real risks of stranded
assets, carbon bubble, will be felt in the

early '20s or already happening.

If you add those up, we should put is already
happening on the left and then you would have

been able to see it's all shortterm.

There's agreement in this room, at least,
that all of this is basically either happening

now or just in the next few years.

Now, if I can switch over for the technicians
to the Tweets.

We have a very good one here from Karim who
asks, what are the barriers for carbon prices?

So, if carbon prices are so great, why don't
we already have them?

Okay?

I mean, we do actually have them in many jurisdictions.

In the EU, for instance.

But the price is also not high enough.

So, maybe we can also tweak that question
to say, why don't we have high enough carbon

prices.

So, that would be a good question to discuss
possibly.

Except that there's a session solely on carbon
pricing after this session.

So, I think we'll leave it.

Postpone that one, okay.

We got quite a bit of a asking about the Ukraine.

Very impressed about the cyber attacks on
the infrastructure.

But we actually also had a bit of pushback.

I'm just going to show one of those Tweets.

Carl says, better grid coordination with EU
grid operators could provide balancing services

for Ukraine from renewables.

Taking advantage of geographic diversity and
northern hydro.

Don't go it alone.

And there was a general consensus simply saying
we need fossil fuels to back up renewables.

Somehow it wasn't satisfactory.

And I also wanted to close with this one.

So, here we have one, this is a Retweet.

I haven't been doing too many Retweets.

But when it's Janos, you make an exception.

I assume he's not in the room here.

But I thought it was interesting that, oops,
this is now in a loop.

This is in German, tells me two things.

First of all, Janos and able to access German
and second, we're reaching a wide audience.

That's something to remember with Twitter,
we reach a lot of people.

But this one is about the European investment
bank.

And has asked, why doesn't the European investment
bank go ahead and devote 500 billion Euros

a year to the transition?

I wonder if someone on the panel could respond
to that.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Mr. Dialogue.

Yeah, I wonder if someone on the on the
panel could respond to that.

Do you want to give it a go?

As I say, we're already financing more for
the energy transition than any other multilateral.

So, we are a big bank.

But we, like any bank, we don't have infinite
amounts of risk-taking capital.

And absolutely central to our business model
is keeping our AAA rating so we can raise

funds extremely cheaply on the global markets.

Not for our benefit because we're not a profitmaking
institution.

But in order to pass down the low financing
costs and long terms to the project promoters.

I would love to dramatically expand what we
can do in the energy transition.

But I would say two things about it.

I mean, one obviously is the is the limits
that our shareholders are willing to provide

us in terms of fresh capital.

The second thing is, it's not it's about
finding the right projects.

I mean, if I was able to report back to our
shareholders that I've got, you know, a 200

billion Euro pipeline of fantastic energy
transition projects that meet all of our standards,

we just don't have the capital.

We can have an interesting conversation.

But in fact, we don't.

We don't have those projects.

The projects need to be prepared.

And this is this is just in relation to
the question on carbon taxation and carbon

pricing.

I'm a fundamental believer in the value of
carbon pricing and we have seen with the European

trading commission, when the price goes up,
emissions go down.

It's absolutely clear.

The system works.

But in the nonETS sectors, in the domestic
sectors where obviously it's a very politically

sensitive issue around carbon taxation.

I think the politicians are aware, it's not
just about the price.

It's about the ability to get, particularly
smallscale consumers and SMEs in a position

to prepare projects.

You can raise carbon taxation all you like.

But already we see energy efficiency projects
with very high rates of economic return and

short payback.

But nobody's doing them.

Nobody's doing them because they don't know
how.

They don't have the technical accuracy capacity
to prepare the projects.

You have incentives between landlords and
tenants, the myopia, a huge understanding.

There's a huge amount of work before we jack
up the price and everything will be fine.

I would love to do 500 billion, but the 500
billion of projects is just not there right

now.

And we needed to an awful lot of work of preparing
the project.

We're not linking the supply and demand.

But it's an enables environment, not just
the project preparation.

We have been hearing that also for 15 years.

We have the money; we don't have the projects.

You wanted to add to that, Thabane.

I'm really happy that Andrew has made the
kind of comments that he has made.

Our experience in the South African context
from windows one, two, three and four, procuring

renewables for solar and wind has been exactly
what he's saying.

The level of preparation is not always up
to scratch.

So, the various elements in preparation that
are not talking it off to make sure bankability,

which is a key area of focus is then addressed.

The training component, the skills transfer,
the technologies that he's making reference

to which at times are very complicated in
nature.

It requires preparation prior to implementation.

And this is a challenge we have had.

As a result, during implementation stage,
it's the only way to begin to deal with those

challenges which make it very difficult for
the technologies to be wellreceived and wellimplemented.

But if in particular potential investors,
the creation and innovation of the technologies,

it's done properly in the preparatory stage,
that will make life easier moving forward.

And that will make life easier for also potential
bankers to make sure that they fund those

projects and to then attract SMEs.

To then attract localization content.

To make sure that there's no negative criticism
during the implementation.

That is absolutely fundamental.

In my statement to Virginia, I said there
have been challenges.

And some of the challenges are what Andrew
is referring to.

Moving forward, what we are going to do in
our integrated resource plan currently, we

have identified 14,000 megawatts that must
be attracted into the wind.

6,000 into the solar.

And our lessons is that all the preparatory
work, all elements of preparation must be

addressed effectively prior to implementation
so that the risk that you're identifying,

Andrew, is dealt with prior to implementation.

And all elements of localization, training,
technologies are then wellreceive during the

implementation stage.

That's a lesson we have learned in the last
eight years of the implementing of renewables.

Before I get to Nataliya, do you want to add
to that, Libby?

We have to look beyond the public sector or
big banks to solve this problem.

Through large, bankable, huge projects.

The energy sector is really where we've made
a lot of progress.

And there's a convenient aspect of the energy
sector.

It went through deregulation in many parts
around the world, opening up the possibility

for banks to get involved, for private sector
investors to get involved.

There are large central projects or smaller,
securitizible projects.

There have been a lot of financial innovation
in the last 2030 years that have enabled banks

and private sector investors to participate.

But outside of that sector, there's a lot
of work to do to open those sectors to even

banks and largescale investments.

I'm really excited about the work that you
mentioned on energy efficiency financing.

Those projects are typically much smaller
compared to large central or many distributed

energy projects that are securitizible.

So, I think there's a lot of financial innovation
that's needed there.

And that can open the sector to banks and
other investors that can be facilitated by

bankers.

But then if we think beyond that to individual
choices that consumers make.

Again, just mentioning the food that's on
our tables.

We have to look to innovative products, innovative
offerings to consumers as well that can direct

just the choices that people make with their
wallet into superior products, superior services

that can also reduce carbon emissions.

And so, we have to get beyond just what we
can do with huge projects and big checks to

true innovations that can be pervasive across
the economy and across different types of

investors, so to speak.

Good.

I would like to add for energy efficiency.

In Ukraine, for example, we created the energy
efficiency fund supported by actually the

German government.

The European Union and also the 50% was covered
by the Ukraine government.

So, the main point is that we would like to
collect not just typical programs and typical

solutions that we are providing in the energy
efficiency sector, but also to collect different

types of technologies and we are trying to
involve different companies that can provide

solutions in one place.

And here I think that's a nice way how the
state can support this on the very high state

priority political level.

So, that was our solution.

And we'll see how we will develop that because
still we have, for example, loans from the

state banks.

We have the IQ energy from the ERBD.

In Ukraine the energy efficiency is now highly
prioritized, and we have different solution

in the financial and technical sector to support
this priority.

That's one point.

The second point, I would like to support
my colleagues with a discussion about technologies.

And we get this feeling during our discussion
with generation.

From time to time, the main answer on a different
questions and problems are we don't have experience.

We don't have partners which have the right
experience and we don't know how to find the

balanced solution.

And the take of the way of solution fighting
from time to time is very long.

Because when you are trying to really to push
your generation, for example, to be much more

low carbon and much more clean, actually they
are very worried about environmental impact

assessment on each project that they need
to develop.

They are very carefully trying to find the
right partners with the right experience.

And that's a question.

So, I think leapfrogging is now a bit complicated
because of technologies.

But in the energy sector we have such a quick
development of any solutions that maybe in

the next year we will have here the different
discussions around some new solutions and

new technologies that will change all sectors
of energy maybe.

And brief comment about the cyber.

So, because I saw the reaction about Ukraine.

Yes.

Ukraine is the last four years at the first
line of the cyber attacks.

That's why we have a great experience.

Last big cyber attack we spent even blackout
and was very proud about that.

So, great work of our system operator.

Great work of the ministry and all stakeholders.

But that's, once again, the answer is technologies.

On the one hand, technologies are our friend.

On the other hand, technologies are actually
making problems and, for example, for us,

we developed the complex organization program
for our substations and lines.

At the same time, we see that from time to
time all good solutions are answered during

the cyber attacks and they can keep security
for us to back up some important things.

Thank you.

Interesting.

Okay.

Since we have been talking a lot about energy
efficiency which I think is a good thing,

the local level, the local government level.

There's such a huge potential at the local
government level for these projects.

I mean, local government, that's where people
live.

That's the ones that have the buildings.

They're the ones that have the transport systems,
et cetera, et cetera.

But they say that they're not getting the
funds.

And I was at a workshop in South Africa years
ago where the people from the government were

saying, we know that our local governments
are doing great things.

But we don't know how to get the fund to them.

And EIB, I'm sure Andrew, you have something
to say about that as well.

I don't know if you're doing any work at the
local level in the Ukraine.

Any ideas how we can improve on that?

Getting funds from the national level into
the communities, into the local government,

municipalities, towns et cetera.

Who wants to start on that?

Just from a financing perspective.

I mean, I mentioned energy performance contracting
is one model where we're trying to develop

the capacity of local governments and municipalities.

In some ways, it's about bringing in private
sector skills to manage projects.

But helps to overcome if you can move the
debt into the private sector balance sheet

and move the risk into the private sector
and repay the debt out of the savings from

energy efficiency.

Just to say for a lot of municipalities, there's
budget restrictions and financing restrictions.

We have to distinguish between these concepts.

So, a lot of municipalities can borrow, but
they're budget capped.

That's an issue that needs to be worked out
nationally and the fiscal space to invest

in the energy transition, what it is.

Where, though, there is budget space but there
are financing constraints, we can help with

that.

Obviously, we can provide longterm financing
to municipalities which often is not available.

Often, we have a conversation with municipalities
that says we have budget space under the national

procedures.

But all we can spend is what we collect in
local taxation.

We have no access to finance.

We need longterm finance.

And often EIB is the first more than threeyear
facility that they've ever had.

And for the first time, it allows municipalities
to start thinking about, outside of national

programs, to start thinking about tenyear
capex programs which they've never had the

opportunity to do before because they never
had a finance for that long.

And the transformation is astonishing.

Suddenly politicians start to think beyond
the next set of municipality elections which

is a great thing to do.

It's fantastic when we can to that.

With my previous answers, Ukraine finds the
very easy solution.

We have on the one hand our energy efficiency
fund.

But the same national ministry that is making
the centralization reform.

We put the energy efficiency fund not at the
ministry of energy or economy, but at the

ministry of regional development.

That was the first step how we connect the
regions with the national source.

So, we developed special loan programs.

As I mentioned, loan programs, different programs
for equipment.

But the point is that if on the original level
local municipalities trying to do some very

ambitious projects, for example, connecting
with European investment bank or EBRD, we

are providing the state guarantee as a state.

And that's the answer.

So, I think that's a very easy way.

First, some very focused typical programs
that might be sourced for different programs.

And the second state guarantees for the highly
prioritized infrastructure or energy projects.

And Thabane.

The local government has a very important
role to play in this transition.

And I think national governments, because
normally energy is a national competency.

With policies that limit the role of local
governments in terms of the financing modeling.

This is going to be critical that national
governments begin to allow municipalities

at the local government level to develop their
own economic financial modeling that would

make this transition easy.

I used to be a municipality manager myself
in my other life.

And we buy electricity from the utility and
we sell it to our customers.

And that's how we generate and increase our
revenues at the local government level.

Now, if you want to change the model and begin
to introduce renewables, you've got to tell

us how to create that revenue stream as a
local government.

In fact, that was our slush funding.

And more often than not, we want to pay our
utility back the money for what we have taken

from them.

So, if you go to South African perspectives
you will find that the majority of municipalities

are owing utilities huge amounts of money.

That was our financial strategy.

Which is not correct.

So, if you move to renewables, you've got
to have a very clear financial strategy of

how to accommodate the new approach at the
local government without affecting the revenue

base.

And that is very fundamental.

And I don't think we have done enough homework
to create a conducive environment for municipalities

to see the beauty of introducing a better
generation and the independence of municipalities

to relax the challenge of the national creed
by embracing renewables as one of their strategies.

And how economically and financially will
that benefit the local government structure?

If we don't do that, we're compromising a
very important strategic framework that we've

created for ourselves at a national level
without accommodating local government in

terms of the implementation.

And that could work negatively in the bigger
scheme of what you want to achieve.

It's good to hear the national government
perspective and someone who has also worked

in the local government.

Libby.

Yeah, so, Breakthrough Energy ventures is
pursuing a little bit different model compared

to other venture funds where we leverage the
coalition that I described that is part of

breakthrough Energy, composed of several global
companies from around the world.

And then we also have, we work a lot with
policy leaders as well.

So, we're not only investing in technologies
that we think can be successful in a begin

policy environment, but we invest in technologies
and business model innovations as well that

we think are fundamentally the right thing
and fundamentally important innovations for

leading this global transition to a cleaner
economy.

And then we work with policy leaders to share
what we've learned, to share our insights

and to identify any road blocks in policy
that are preventing some of these technologies

from coming to market.

On the local and municipality side, I would
just like to point out a couple of things

that local and municipality governments can
do that are not necessarily restrained by

budget or would require a large investment.

That's a couple simple things.

Regulation and then urban planning.

So, a lot of regulation that is controlled
at the regional level includes building codes.

A lot of building codes, particularly in the
US and in a lot of places around the world,

for example, require that buildings are made
of Portland cement.

That's a very specific technology choice that's
locked into a lot of building codes.

In general, policymakers don't like to pick
specific technologies.

But this is one case that we've identified
where a specific technology is written into

the code.

And we're now starting to evaluate a lot of
different technologies that can reduce carbon

emissions from the cement and concrete sector.

And there may need to be some changes at local
building code levels.

This is pretty nitty gritty, to enable some
of these new technologies to come to market.

But again, this is a huge sector of emissions.

Just from just from emissions from concrete
production.

The other one on urban planning.

There are a lot of innovative business models
around new transportation options.

That are catching on so quickly and are
it kind of attracting people out of their

individual passage vehicles to much more efficient
modes of transportation.

There are some revenueneutral, sort of costneutral
and revenue positive that cities and governments

can put into place around congestion, parking,
things like that that will make the city more

livable, more enjoyable and reduce emissions
globally and also reduce local pollution.

So, there are a lot of things beyond just
the big funds and the big budgets that are

required that can make a lot of improvements.

And go faster.

Absolutely.

Yep.

And can I ask you this, probably it's on a
lot of people's minds.

Do you see, we're from the same country, that
this rollback under the President and administration

of regulations is going to be hurting in the
longterm.

In those areas.

You know, I think the private sector really
has the opportunity to lead.

We've seen that in the United States.

And we see it around the world.

I think the big I'm so inspired by the
work that we've heard from the ministers on

the panel here.

A lot of it has been around opening up the
sectors to private sector innovation and investment.

And I think we've seen that in the US.

These sectors are open to private sector investment.

And we've seen the private sector identify
renewable energy as a positive investment.

And they're going ahead and they're making
those investments.

So, the current administration has rolled
back, you know, unfortunately we're no longer

part of the Paris Accord.

And we've rolled back the administration
has rolled back some other some other kind

of policies.

However, we're seeing the private sector charge
ahead.

And continue to have recordbreaking deployments
of renewable energy and we're still seeing

a transition to renewable energy generation.

And I can confirm that if I may.

I found this yesterday from CBS News.

I don't know if you saw that, Libby.

It said that 12 trillion US dollars, that's
one in every four dollars of assets managed

professionally, is now invested in portfolios
seeking to be sustainable, responsible and

impactful.

$1 out of every four.

And these investors are using free online
tools, for example, fossilfreefunds.org to

be able to see if their mutual funds in their
portfolios are indeed climate friendly.

And the headline was, investors are fighting
back.

So, confirming exactly what you're saying.

There's a lot of investor preference.

If people put money to work, they want to
put it to work for the outcomes they want

to see in their economy.

Not just financial outcomes, but the world
we want to live in.

We do see a large investor base moving in
that direction.

And even beyond that, renewable energy just
has a positive investment case today.

So, see we success breeds success and it's
a growing investment sector.

And policy can certainly open up new sectors
for investment.

Some of the things that we heard about today,
energy efficiency in the renewables going

on around the world.

We'll open that up further.

Just to add, certainly what we see from our
perspective is very strong leadership at the

city and state level in the United States.

So, for example, the Mayors like Bloomberg's
initiative is now become an incredibly powerful

global movement at the city level to drive
the energy transition.

We're very much cooperating with that.

So, there seems to be different signals coming
from different levels of the US government.

Yeah.

And speaking of local level, we're seeing
now pressure coming from grassroots.

The students and pupils who are now hitting
the streets.

Maybe you can say something about your experience
in your countries, South Africa and the Ukraine,

if you're seeing this.

And if it's going to make the investor community
concerned that that this pressure is going

to need going to have to maybe take another
or a more a faster path towards those trillions.

We've seen some impatience from the people
who are on Twitter that we need it now.

We need to get these this money going now.

We don't have time to talk about it, discuss
it and do this first and then do that.

Next, we need to really move fast.

Are you seeing that pressure where you are?

Yes.

There's huge pressure.

And I think private sector has a very important
role to play.

From a technology perspective we need to assist
our governments to make sure that the cost

of technologies from a financial modeling
perspective is mitigated.

You don't want government to be under pressure
to provide energy efficiency technologies

at a high cost.

Because then government would have to subsidize
more.

So, you need partners in these technologies
that are very circumspect about the financial

perspective in the process.

Our experience is that indeed windows one,
two, three and four, the financial modeling

was slightly a challenge.

And this has put pressure on delivering to
the cross roads, on delivering to people that

cannot afford the services of these technologies.

Which work against our noble objective of
using renewables against the supply of electricity

through coal.

So, we've got to be very sensitive in that.

And my plea will be to the private sector
and technology architectures to make sure

that the pricing component is also mitigated
to some extent.

That will make it easier to deal with the
challenge at a grassroot level.

We do see pressure, but that's a positive
pressure.

That's a pressure that means drive.

So actually, for example, the pressure on
the government in the Ukraine was the reason

that we changed the environmental impact assessment
standards.

So, we are open for the dialogue.

And, for example, a lot of people who are
making pressure from the NGO community or

expert community, and in Ukraine we have a
very strong NGO community, they are actually

helping the government to be better and we
have an open dialogue.

But what good is in Ukraine, I think, we have
also very strong startup and IT community.

And they are making no pressure.

But they're making the real leapfrogs with
a different decision and different solutions.

So, I think here that's the question about
the balance.

We in one hand, we should ready carefully
and sustainably with other decisions.

Because we have our responsibility.

We should work with resilience of our decisions
and what we are doing in providing.

But at the same time, we need to be open for
the dialogue and open for new proposals and

solutions.

That's why I think the right pressure is the
great thing to be better and to develop your

decision in the right direction.

The other thing I would add is that this pressure
is, again, a positive pressure.

And I think we see this challenge as so large
that we can't have enough innovators who are

dedicating this energy, this pressure, to
coming upping with new solution u solutions.

New technologies, new financial structures,
new projects to prepare that are bankable.

We all have a part to channel that pressure
into a positive expression of opportunity.

And to students who are coming out of school,
who are excited about this space, you know,

it's never too early to be a leader in this
field.

And to bring a new idea forward.

So, encourage those students coming out of
the space to follow those ideas and shape

them into something that's actionable.

So, yes, we're also feeling a lot of pressure
as a U.N. institution.

We just finished a consultation process on
the future of our energy landing policies.

And we do this about every six years.

And this consultation process just drew more
interest than we've ever experienced before.

And it's from a new generation who are becoming
politically and environmentally aware.

And suddenly they see an opportunity to make
their views known in an institution that has

a large capacity like ours.

And it is it is challenging.

Because obviously we want to encourage it.

But, you know, there is very difficult challenges
being put to us like why aren't you financing

500 billion of new investments every year?

Why don't you completely stop financing any
gas whatsoever?

And these are things we're gonna have to
we're gonna have to deal with.

But what's clear is there's a new generation
coming into politics, coming into industry,

coming into institutions that is going to
transform the mindset.

It's going to transform the mindset of how
we work.

And we're going to have to take decisions
a little bit more quickly and be a little

bit more ambitious.

So, in fact, I can't wait for a lot of these
kids we had kids protesting outside the

bank about four or five weeks ago.

They came from the local schools that we're
still financing gas infrastructure.

It's an absolutely legitimate process.

I can't wait until we can hire these people.

To learn through college, and if they have
the same passion and drive and ambition, I

want them working at the investment bank.

Good, and these driven, passionate young people
are not only entering institutions.

But they're also entering as we mentioned
before the retail investor class.

Starting to earn money, put some away if their
pension funds and 401Ks in the US and other

things for savings.

And they're making choices on where they want
their money invested.

They're small investors compared to some of
the large funds around the world.

But they are starting to make up those large
funds around the world.

They're also entering the consumer class.

And they are seeking products and services
that improve their lives but are also beneficial

for climate change.

So, that's another thing to point out to young
people who are entering the workforce and

who are looking for an expression of their
own energy is to come up with innovations

and technologies and business models that
can also serve this new consumer class because

they are hungry for solutions that improve
their lives and make a positive impact on

climate change.

Very good.

I got the very sad signal that we're coming
to a close.

I would have liked to have gone on.

We can use those five minutes to get a final
yeah, what should I say.

Not statement.

That sounds, but you have been so positive
and constructive that maybe let's say going

forward into the 2020s, which is just around
the corner, how you see things happening where

you are? Nataliya, start with you.

I think for Ukraine the most important thing
is to keep the direction on the Euro integration.

To keep our main strategy with implementation
of the right things.

So, I hope we will followup with increasing
of renewables.

I hope we will followup with Paris Agreement
implementation and low carbon development.

We need to be a bit all more responsible about
what we will leave on this planet after us.

Especially in the energy sector.

Thank you.

And we wish you a lot of luck with that.

I think we don't have a question; we need
to be sustainable financially and environmentally.

It's not another option that we have at our
disposal.

It's got to be done.

We just have to make sure that from a financial
perspective the support is there.

Technologies are sustainable.

And reasonable enough from a costing perspective
to make implementation easier.

And the governments of the world should
shall stop talking and be more actionoriented

in our policies.

It's easy to talk.

But doing is another.

And I think we have been talking for too long.

But action is very slow.

In South Africa, we welcome all investors.

In Botswana, in Mozambique, in our region
as a whole there's a huge potential for use

renewables and technologies that will relax
our national grids to make sure we achieve

the goals we have set for ourselves through
the Paris Climate Agreement of which the majority

of us are party to.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Andrew.

I mean, I suppose my final message would be,
obviously, institutions like the EIB and other

public financing institutions, we need to
up our game.

We need to be more ambitious.

But we will never alone be able to deliver
the financing required through the energy

transition.

We need to crowd in private sector finance.

We need to blend public and private risk taking.

We need to find my models for doing that.

And create the framework conditions that brings
the trillions of Euro into the energy transition.

We need to play a role but change our mentality
a little bit how we work with the private

sector.

Thank you.

At Breakthrough Energy Ventures, we see this
point as just the beginning of a global transition

to a clean economy.

With new solutions across every sector of
the economy that can reduce carbon emissions.

And we think there's a huge role for innovation
in business models that can open up markets

for existing technologies.

But then also an opportunity for truly breakthrough
new technologies that are not commercial yet

to help with flexibility of the grid and integration
of renewables all the way to new sources of

food that we put on our table.

New modes of transportation that can move
things around the planet in a carbonfree manner.

And we look forward to working with the public
sector, the private sector, really everyone

has a role to play in this transition.

Thank you.

Thanks, Libby.

With that, I will close this session.

I would ask you to give a warm round of applause
for all of our panelists once more.


