What are the geopolitical consequences of
the transformation of the global energy system?

Fossil fuels shaped geopolitics in the past.

Now renewable energy is becoming cheaper and
more readily available around the globe.

Technology innovations in generation, digitalization
and energy storage will support the move away

from fossil fuels and towards renewable energy.

This will change the global distribution of
power and change geopolitics in the age of

renewables.

So I'd like to introduce the panelists.

Thank you very much for coming.

I'll start with myself.

I'm Linda Davis, the CEO of Giraffe Bioenergy,
we are looking to solve the cooking problem.

Thank you for mentioning it, 3 billion people
don't have access to cooking fuels with effects

on their health.

I'm going to ask the panelists to work with
me a little bit, maybe give a wave to the

audience so I'm not confusing myself with
my right, your left, I'm not very good with

that.

Next to me is state secretary, Minister for
petroleum Rhode Island card, if I butcher

your name, introduce yourself with the correct
pronunciation.

And then from Jordan, Hala Zawati.

Thank you.

The Minister for the environment, transport
and energy communications from Switzerland,

miss Simonetta Sommaruga.

And then the Foreign Minister from Maldives,
Abdulla Shahid.

The Commissioner for Infrastructure and Energy,
African Union, that's Dr. Amani AbouZeid.

And then finally, the senior adviser for international
security program and resource security of

New America, Sharon Burke.

Excellent.

Without further ado we're going to get started
with our deep dive.

So, I'm going to ask the panelists, as they
answer this first question, to give some introductory

remarks about your understanding of the global
discussion, the geopolitical political situation.

So, as Norway has a prominent role in the
commission on geopolitics for renewable energy,

it would be great if you can comment on some
of the key findings of this commission.

Thank you so much for inviting us to discuss
this important issue this morning.

And thank you also so much for this phenomenal
keynote this morning.

It's been very interesting to hear.

Absolutely all of them.

And yes, to the question.

We have been a part of that commission.

As we have discussed, and as we all discuss
at this conference and overall, we are in

a huge energy transition at this moment.

Our world's energy systems are rapidly changing.

And we see that through technology growth,
we see that through reduce of costs and so

on.

And we also see that, the governments and
the countries, environmental or policies are

changing.

And are putting progress into this.

And therefore we, also through Germany and
also through the Emirates asked this arena

to set down this international commission
to see the geopolitical impacts on this.

And as we have discussed and as Mary mentioned
in the last keynote, this climate change does

not see any borders.

And I think that is the most important point
on this geopolitical discussion.

And what the commission found is that they
saw that we could, through this energy transition,

reduce the geopolitical impacts because we
are reducing the climate impacts, we are reducing

the local pollution.

And we are giving people better countries
and better societies to live in.

And that's overall what I think we have to
have and mention when we are to discuss the

geopolitical impact is that we are creating
better societies for people.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

So, as we know, Jordan is considered a small
country in the region.

And renewable energy transition, you know,
is booming in Jordan.

Targets have been met and lowered by your
investments in the solar PV.

So, what next?

What are the next steps?

Let me start by thanking you and thanking
the organizers for this great Berlin energy

transition dialogue.

Yes, Jordan is a small country.

Yet with big achievements.

And if we're going to talk about achievements
in renewable energy and the energy sector

inning your, I would also like to talk about
the bigger picture which is the resilience

of the country and its people.

And when we tell the story of energy, it tells
you also the story of the resilience of Jordan

and its people.

So, Jordan was a few years ago in 2012 fully
dependent on gas for generating our electricity.

And then actually we were hit by the Asia
Spring and the shortages of gas.

Which hit us really hard.

And the Jordanian people are still suffering
because of that.

Yet we faced that challenge, which was a big
challenge for us.

Yes, we were not ready for that challenge.

By looking at renewable energy as a solution.

And if you asked me in 2014 what was the percentage
of renewables for electrification in Jordan,

I would have told you 1%.

Today we exceeded 10%.

End of this year, 16%.

And 2020, 20%.

So and this is this was very important
for us.

This year we ranked on the Bloomberg Climate
Scope as the third country in the world as

attractiveness to renewable energy projects.

This year we got an unprecedented prize of
solar PV power projects which reached $2.4

dollar cents.

Jordan is small, yet the achievements in renewable
energies were really big during the past few

years.

What made that happen was actually the commitment
of the Jordanian people.

The transparency.

Having a clear strategy moving forward.

And you asked me what's next.

We have achieved
Minister Zawati, that is impressive, I would

like to come back and see how you did that.

But I think you will agree that is very impressive.

We would love to have those kind of price
points, certainly in Kenya.

I would like to move on to you, minister Sommaruga.

My question to you is more of a general nature.

If You could just set the stage, explain in
a little more detail the impacts of the geopolitical

the geopolitical impacts of the global energy
transitions.

You know, what kind of risks are evolving?

You know, what is your understanding sort
of how the global north and the global south

are going to interact in this time of turbulence?

Thank you, Linda.

I was supposed to speak in German, but I see
that there's no translation here.

So, I think I speak in
Can we get some translations, please?

Some headsets?

I need one too.

Okay.

I can speak in English.

Start in English.

Okay.

I would like to thank you IRENA for this report.

Because I think the energy transition and
the geopolitical implications is something

which is extremely important.

I would like to make three points, three short
points.

The first point is that I think the renewable
energies could be a piece, a project of peace.

Second point, I think about the commodities,
the minerals you use also for the new technologies

for the renewable energies and we should not
make two times the same mistakes.

And my third point is about energy efficiency.

So, I start with the peace project.

When I read the report, which is really very
interesting I think that we have seen in the

past that the facile energies have been some
causes also for conflict worldwide.

Not only conflict, but even wars.

And so, I think that the renewable energies,
they have the potential to have no more of

this kind of conflicts.

Why?

Because I think one of the main issues about
the renewables is that they are they're

certain independence for the country.

They are everywhere.

In every country there are renewable energies.

So, there is more independence from the fossil
fuel exportation countries.

And with the renewable energies, there is
the possibility to have a decentralized energy.

So, I think these two things is a democratization
of energy.

And this is something which is extremely important.

So, I'm very glad.

But everybody knows that to have the renewable
energies, the potential of them, we need investment.

We need investments in the technologies, in
the know-how of technologies.

And I think these kind of investments, they
have still to be done.

And I say it especially to the industrial
countries.

I say it as well at the address of banks,
of insurances, that they should do now their

investments towards the renewable energies.

If I look about all the energy investments
in the 2017 there were $1800 billion.

More than half of them went still into fossil
energies.

I think we have to change there.

And the director of IRENA, Mr. La Camera,
he said it today very offensive.

Second point about the commodities.

I think to report from IRENA, it shows that
still we have renewable energies, we need

minerals.

Cobalt, graphite.

And many of these commodities, minerals, come
from countries with weak governance.

We should not do two times the same mistakes
as I say.

And I think my country, Switzerland, has a
special respondent.

We have in Switzerland about 500 countries
in the trade of commodities.

And we know that the human rights, environmental
standards are very important for the extraction

of this kind of minerals.

And so, I think we have a huge responsibility
that as I mentioned, we do not two times the

same mistakes as we did with the fossil fuels,
with the mines, where human rights were not

respected.

Where the environment of the local people
was destroyed and, in this sense, I think

we have a responsibility also in developing
the renewable energies.

Because today those countries which have the
most commodities, the richest countries in

commodities, they are at the same time those
countries have the highest level of child

death.

So, I think this contradiction cannot go on.

And I think Mary Robinson showed us that energy
is something which is very central for development,

also economic development, of every country.

And I was during eight years now Minister
of migration.

And I know as long as we do not have economic
development and energy is central for that,

we still have also forced migration which
we do not want.

And I think I stop with that.

I just wanted to stop with the efficiency.

We should not we should not forget efficiency
is also a part of climate and energy development

we need for our future.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

You know, I'm taking away some keywords there.

You know, it's a peace project.

That is, you know, that I think something
that we all should take with us.

It should not a be a point of conflict.

But we can work collectively together.

I think the themes are starting to tomorrow.

Yeah.

Now, moving on to sort of the small island
nations which again, we all know are particularly

vulnerable to the changes, the global changes
that are happening.

So, to discuss this, you know, Minister Shahid,
I would like you to give a general view from

the lens of the Maldives how you see renewable
energy impacting specifically the geopolitics

of your small island nations.

Thank you very much, Linda.

Thank you to the foreign minister of foreign
affairs Heiko Maas for inviting me as a representative

of the small island states to participate
in this very important conference and to raise

the voice of small island states.

The unique nature of small island states,
including the Maldives, makes it essential

for us to conceptualize the renewable energy
and geopolitics in a holistic manner.

As many of you would know, the Maldives, for
example, is an archipelago over islands

that as big as Saudi Arabia.

Our land area is a flexible one, depending
on the tide.

When it is high tide, we have a little bit
less land.

And low tide we get a little bit more.

But the largest island in the Maldives is
about 3 miles in length and about half a mile

in width.

The highest point that you can ever get in
the Maldives is 2.5 meters above sea level.

6 feet.

Even just a little bit taller than me.

The population of the Maldives, just like
all the other small island states, is below

half a million.

We are counting 350,000 plus.

The beauty of nature, the beauty that nature
has given to us makes us small island states

special.

The IPCC report that was issued in October
2018 is very clear.

If the world is unable to stabilize the global
temperature rise to 1.5 degrees for the next

50100 years, countries like the Maldives would
cease to survive.

I have heard on this stage several of the
speakers talk about the issue of environmental

change, climate change being an existential
issue.

For the Maldives, for other small island states,
it is happening.

We go through it every day.

Where would another tsunami hit?

When would we get washed away?

When would our countries cease to exist?

These are questions.

As a generation Maldivians are asking, our
children are asking.

And for that reason, the technological advances
we are making are a welcome development for

the Maldives.

But to go back to the original question that
you have put forward, for us, unless we start

the runaway impacts of climate change, some
countries, such as the Maldives, because we

would cease to exist, geopolitics will enter
into our decision-making process only after

we secure a place in the geographical map
of the world.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Appreciate that.

Thank you.

We've heard a lot about Africa today, which
is good.

So, I would like to invite Dr.Amani AbouZeid
to hear your perspectives.

you know, what are the relevant aspects of
the global energy transition that you want

to particularly emphasize?

Thank you very much, Linda.

Today is a very special today.

It's the second time I participate in this
very important event.

I'm saying this is a special day because the
keynote speeches we heard this morning are

very inspirational and hit a special cord
in my soul.

I would like to refer to the speech by Her
Excellency Madam President Mary Robinson in

particular about human rights and about energy.

And you've heard and, right, we've heard
a lot about Africa today.

But I'll speak to a different Africa.

My Africa.

Energy and human rights.

It's the deprivation from basic services and
especially not having access to energy is

a human is a violation of human rights.

And ensuring access to all to energy is also
a human right.

And I want to speak to that.

I want to speak to the access to everybody
and especially in Africa to energy.

As we speak, 51% of the continents' population
do not have access to energy.

And the 50 or so percent who are using energy,
half of it is bioenergy from firewood and

charcoal.

We cannot accept that.

As I said, it's a violation to human rights.

It's also we also have a moral responsibility
towards the world's population.

And Linda, I pay special attention to energy
for cooking.

Knowing that on the continent there are millions
of women and children who either are killed

and/or suffocate because of the fumes from
this charcoal and firewood for used in

cooking.

So, that's the first point about human rights
and energy.

The second is about technology.

And technology because Africa has a fantastic
story to tell when it comes to digitalization

and leapfrogging in the world of technology.

Especially the ICT.

More than ever, our continent is adopting
this new technology and making it work for

ourselves in paths that were not necessarily
followed by any other nation or continent

in the world.

We're leapfrogging.

We're not using or going through the traditional
paths for development.

And we're using even this technology in the
energy.

Earlier we heard about mini grids and offgrids,
and this is particular important for us since

90% of our population lives in rural areas.

And we are making this new technology work
for us.

We have examples and experiences like in Kenya,
for instance.

Where an offgrid solar is paid for using the
mobile money.

Which, by the way, was invented by Africans
in Africa for the whole world.

So, there you go.

Third, I 
want to talk about what we are doing in Africa.

I hear, I mean, I go to all these forums and
everyone is talking about Africa.

But no one talks about what Africa is doing
for itself.

And that's what I want to emphasize.

Here we have in the room the largest solar
power plant in the world as we speak.

And I had the honor of contributing myself
to this fantastic project as an initiator,

as a financier, and working on this project.

Followed by Egypt was also implementing the
very large was going to be the largest

solar power plant in the world.

Offgrid is rolling out across the country.

Energy transition, we're doing that across
the continent in two ways.

One, adopting in the African Union the decarbonization
paths to also improve the carbonization of

the existing energy resources.

But also, energy program, a very ambitious
one.

Championing program in East Africa and other
parts of the world.

And small island states, promoting smart infrastructure,
including smart transition.

Smart cities across the continent are being
we now have smart cities using the technology

in providing infrastructure.

Especially energy.

Adopted and adapted now thanks to big data
due to the behavior of each and every individual

on the continent.

That's what I wanted to talk to you about
Africa taking the lead for itself.

And Africa changing the its itself to make
sure that you have integrated continent, sustainable,

providing access to all, and in a sustainable
way for the benefit not only of Africa.

But of the world.

Thank you very much.

so, now we've heard.

Thank you very much.

Appreciate those comments.

And we'll come back.

We'll come back a bit more.

Sharon, you've got the enviable position of
speaking after everybody has spoken.

So, I'm going let you pick up on some of the
key points that have been brought up from

the US perspective.

Again, by way of introduction, Sharon is a
senior adviser on energy security and stability

from the US.

Thank you so much, Linda.

It's just a pleasure to be at this wonderful
conference with a really tremendous panel

of speakers.

So, in 2016 my former boss, Barack Obama,
said, if you could choose any time in human

history to be alive, you would choose right
now.

Today.

Now, keep in mind he said that after the election
of Donald Trump.

So, why would he say that?

I miss him so much.

Why would he say that?

He was looking at the bigger picture and the
biggest picture of all.

There are more children in school than at
any time in human history.

There are fewer people living with chronic
hunger than at any time in human history.

There are whole diseases that have been eradicated
for everyone in the world.

Smallpox, polio.

Humanity is flourishing.

In 1800, there were a billion of us.

Almost all of us lived in extreme poverty.

And even the richest of us died from preventable
diseases.

Today there are 7 billion of us and far too
many of us still don't live as well as we

should.

But so many of us live better than we ever
have before.

Now, there's a dark side to all of this progress.

It's fueled by fossil fuels.

They got us here.

But the consequences are coming due.

So, the question now is, is this moment in
human history, this spectacular moment in

human history, is it a moment?

Or is it a trend?

And that depends on the energy transition.

Whether we can make it happen.

So, my government, the United States government,
is talking in terms today of great power competition.

The current President notwithstanding, we
don't have to be afraid of competition.

Global competition.

Doesn't have to be a bad thing.

It brings us investment.

It creates new producers.

It opens new markets.

And it brings innovation.

And that is what we sorely need.

We heard that this morning from the IEA that
the scale of the problem we have to solve,

we should be realistic about it and not underestimate
it.

And that is gonna need a whole lot of innovation.

We need the dollars to come to higher efficiency
solar.

We need the dollars to come to energy storage.

We need the dollars to come to more efficient
use of energy.

Wholly new uses of energy.

A digital age, an information age.

Transition from the industrial age.

We need that innovation more than we've ever
needed it before.

And I'm glad to say that in my country, I
know the rhetoric from the top is not encouraging.

But that doesn't speak for everyone.

My home state of California, for example.

It's the fifth largest economy in the world,
behind Germany, but ahead of the United Kingdom.

And California has a goal of 100% clean energy
for their electricity sector by 2045.

So, below that rhetoric at the top, there's
a lot of great action happening and a lot

of innovation.

California will lead my country to that future
just as it has for many years.

We will be there.

What really concerns me when we talk about
geopolitics is what the commissioner said.

It's really easy to get distracted by who
is up, who is down, who is going to gain or

lose power.

We need to laser focus on its people.

People are going to make it better.

What worries me most of all about this moment
is what great power competition means in terms

of where the investment really is.

So, the US government in its national budget
puts most of its money into people.

60% of our national budget goes to Social
Security, Medicare and Medicaid.

That's all about people and about social services.

But of the rest of the money, a great deal
of it goes to defense.

A trillion dollars.

When you count the defense budget, veterans
and nuclear weapons.

A trillion dollars.

And what I say at this moment that we should
all be concerned about is that my country

is not putting enough money, enough emphasis,
enough activity into the "Everything else."

Into diplomacy and trade and investment.

All the things that are going to bring us
an energy transition.

We're not doing enough there.

We are hyperfocused on military means and
we are not alone.

And I ask you, where does that end?

If the socalled great powers are only preparing
for war, there's only one end to that.

I can't be a zerosum game.

We can't have some countries fall and some
not get to rise.

And we can't be hyperfocused on military means.

What Obama said at the end of that article
back in 2016 is, this has to be something

that is for all of us and of all of us.

And that's what the energy transition looks
like.

Thank you very much.

Yeah.

Yes.

As we get our translators, I'm going to ask
Mr. Dialogue to give us an update on where

we are with the Mentimeter.

It is running.

I think last I looked we had about 43 people
who participated.

There's still time.

In about ten minutes we'll give you the results.

Thank you.

Fantastic.

Just by show of hands.

Have we interacted?

Are we on there?

Do we know what Mr. Dialogue is talking
about?

Mr. Dialogue, I think you need to talk to
us a bit more.

I'm not seeing many hands in the room.

All you need to do is point your phone at
this image.

At least on mine that works.

You will probably be redirected to the poll.

If you're on a laptop, enter Menti.com.

And get to the website and enter the number
code.

We will leave this up for a few seconds and
that will take you directly to the questions

about this geopolitics session.

Thank you very much.

Panelists, for this session I really want
us to be a little bit more specific.

Right?

To quote what President Mary Robinson told
us, time for action, right?

Lots of words, right?

Lots of sobering words from my fellow Californian
on the end seat there.

But from your specific nations, from your
specific countries, while I'm asking these

questions, really think about the positive,
and concrete steps that you're taking that

we can also borrow for our specific nation,
right?

So, starting with you, sir.

What is Norway's view on the rapid growth
of renewables and the impacts of the global

energy sector from the view of Norway?

Norway is enthusiastic in this energy transition
towards more renewables.

Norway is very well experienced with renewables
as we have used our resources both our resources,

but also our in the region and continental
shelf on a very sustainable and good way.

And we are very experienced in doing that.

We are already powering our private houses,
powering our businesses with renewable power

in almost 100%.

And we have a lot of this technology and we
want to share it.

We want to get in these kinds of forums and
dialogues to be in these forums for discussions

to share our technology and our knowledge
on this.

But I would also like to say that in this
transition we know that Germany is now taking

huge steps towards phasing out coal and also
phasing out nuclear.

And we know that Germany and also Europe are
going to need sustainable and reliable energy

resources.

And we believe that natural gas will be a
part of that for many years.

But that depends on how we use our resources.

And we have to use our resources in a good
way.

And at last I have to bring also up the dimension
of social acceptance around renewables as

my colleague mentioned.

This is a peace project.

But it's our responsibility to make this a
peace project.

Because we know, actually we have learned
also from Norway that discussions on onshore

wind are not uncontroversial.

These are big debates and we see that many
just don't want these projects in their countries

and not in their backyards.

And we have to go in front.

We have to show a good political leadership
to make this green energy transition happen.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Minister Zawati.

You had started to answer this question and
I cut you off.

But perhaps you can continue giving us your
experiences developing, you know, the solar

projects like you talked about.

Be very specific.

Perhaps commenting on the political will,
for instance, you know, nothing happens in

a vacuum.

You know, the investment.

How did you all put this together for you
now, you know, speak of the successes that

you do?

Thank you.

Because it's a joy for me to talk about the
story of renewables in Jordan.

As I said, the advancement we did in renewable
energy along like with Morocco in the Arab

world is really a story to tell.

So, reaching today 10% of our electricity
from renewables in addition, by the way, to

a figure that might be stunning for most of
the people.

Today in Jordan we reach over 99% of our population
with our grid.

So, today very few actually would be connected
offgrid with solar systems.

And despite that, and despite reaching all
these people, today we launched a new project.

And it's for the poor specifically.

And it's ongrid solar systems for the poor
who are today benefiting from a national aid

fund.

And that would be for free.

Giving them solar systems on the rooftops
or in backyards.

But what made this happen in Jordan?

I started to say that the commitment of the
Jordanian government and people to support

renewable energy.

The legal framework.

And believe me, if it wasn't for the legal
framework which we set in 2012, we wouldn't

be where we are today.

So, any country that wants to go for renewables
needs to set the legal framework first.

Second, the tax incentives that we gave.

And this was really important as well.

The capacity building of the people.

Today we have over 450 companies in Jordan
providing energy efficiency solutions and

renewable energy solutions.

And Jordan is a small country as we said.

So, this number is phenomenal for us in Jordan.

Also, we worked very hard to spread the awareness.

And spreading awareness was by doing rather
than talking about the thing.

So, we have a fund in the Minister of Energy
and Mineral Resources JREEEF, the Jordan Renewable

Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund and we go
to all sectors and fund some projects.

We funded solar water heaters on rooftops
for over 20,000 households in Jordan because

we do believe that one house that has a solar
water heater, the neighbors would be envious

of not spending that much on solar water heating.

And so, this is spreading awareness.

We went to hotels and implemented energy efficiency
measures.

We went to factories and implemented energy
audits and reduction of usage of energy.

Lots and lots.

Two mosques and installed renewable energy
systems.

And all this that I'm talking about is on
the, say, consumer level.

But the big picture, you should come today
to a government in Jordan where most of the

solar farms are there.

And it is really a success story.

Many of the German companies probably sharing
with us today know what I'm talking about.

Because we transferred also the experience
from here.

Facilitating finance.

And this is very important.

And this is something that we have done.

The Central Bank of Jordan facilitated funds
for renewable energy with an interest rate

that is low.

Almost half the interest rate for other projects.

The right policies and procedures at the time.

And today we've reached the point where Mr. Fatih
from IEA spoke about, going to 20% of renewable

energy.

And we faced the issues that he talked about.

Let me talk about the geopolitics of things
just to show you that when you reach that

point, it is very important that you have
good connections, interconnections, integrated

grids between your country and the countries
around.

And this affects the relationship between
countries.

So, is renewable energy affecting the geopolitics
from other sides than her excellency talked

about?

Yes.

We see clearly it would be very costly for
us to go for more renewables unless we were

able to export part of it or exchange with
neighbors countries.

The cost of storage is kind of high.

But export export/import between countries
would be much cheaper.

And that's another reason why renewable energy
would be changing the geopolitical map of

the world.

Thank you very much.

Very concrete steps.

I'm really thankful for how you've articulated
that.

Minister Sommaruga.

You're able to speak in German because now
we have our headsets.

You know, again, I'm using you to kind of
give us more background and basics on this

issue.

So, the question I want to ask is specifically
on the report that on geopolitics and renewables.

Is there anything that we have not heard so
far?

You know, if you had to highlight specific
aspects from that report, what would you like

this audience to know?

Well, thank you.

I think the report is there is very many
things in it.

But I think when you read the report you get
very excited because you think this is really

a wonderful project and a good direction we
can go on.

When you think about afterwards, I think there
are some questions.

I mean, this energy transition has opportunities.

But it has also losers.

And what about the losers?

What about those countries who live still
until now and maybe also the next few years

or tens of years from the export of fossil
fuels?

What about them?

They will also have to have a kind of change,
a kind of project.

And I think we have to think about that as
well.

Because I was very much impressed by what
you told about the energy transition in Jordan.

Also, the commissioner from the African Union.

I think the transition has to be socially
accepted.

The population has to understand what happens.

Every change is difficult.

Switzerland has a direct democracy.

So, with when we introduce, for example, a
tax on CO2 we have a referendum.

So, people have to accept that.

And I think this kind of change is it would
be worth to still look a little bit where

the opportunities?

How can we get there?

What about the losers?

Those people who are afraid that they have
less chances until now.

And I think this is not that we need a new
report, but I think this has to be still discussed

quite a lot.

Otherwise maybe in ten years when we come
back here then we are not as optimistic as

we are today.

And I would like to be optimistic.

But I think so we have really to think about
how this transition can go on so that people

understand it.

They can support it and it's also the best
for every one of them.

And I think this is quite a challenge for
all of us.

Either in Switzerland, as a country where
we have already introduced, for example, this

CO2 tax.

This is a tax on the stationary fuels.

And we give twothirds of this tax, we give
back to the population.

So, I think socially this is a good thing.

Because people who do not need a lot of this
kind of stationary fuels, they get back more

money than they spend.

And those who need a lot of stationary fuels,
because they have big houses, so, they have

to pay.

And onethird we get back.

We do not give back to the population.

And with that we have a program for changes
for the buildings.

More sustainable buildings.

And heating.

And this was accepted in a referendum in our
country.

It would not be accepted probably if you introduced
a tax on CO2 for the cars.

So, I think mobility is something that is
still something very difficult for people

to accept any changes at all.

Unfortunately.

Thank you very much.

And I'll ask a followup question in the next
round about some very key point that you made.

But I really do want to hear back from the
Maldives.

How could the friends of the Maldives help
the country in contributing to security in

the Indian Ocean?

And what specifically are you doing as a country,
you know, to secure yourselves?

Thank you, Linda.

Geopolitics is usually understood in its conflictual
concept.

It's a rivalry.

But I believe, and the Maldives believe, in
case of climate change, geopolitics should

be interpreted to promoting that was nice.

[music played]
I don't know what that means.

It should be promoted as interdependence,
collaboration and cooperation and shared responsibility.

We have to change the concept of geopolitics.

When we look at the Maldives location in the
Indian Ocean, on the east the east and

the west we are equidistance from the coast
of Indonesia and the coast of Somalia on the

west.

That is where we straddle in the Indian Ocean.

We are also from the north to the south across
the equator.

The 8.5-degree channel of the Maldives is
one of the most used sea lanes of the Indian

Ocean.

90,000 vessels across the 8.5-degree channel
every year.

90,000 vessels is about 36 billion tons of
cargo.

And almost two third of it is oil.

Traded between the Middle East and Asia, Northeast
Asia.

For the Maldives, it's important to make sure,
however small we are, to make sure that the

responsibility that geographically has been
bestowed on us to provide free maritime travel

between these two large economies is sustained.

And for that, we need to have good relationships
between all countries.

And sometimes good relationships come with
a lot of diplomacy.

A lot of diplomatic work.

Sometimes it doesn't work.

But most of the time we have been able to
survive as an independent state forever.

However small the country may be.

With renewable energy, what we are going to
see is the economies are going grow because

the cost of production is going to be decreased
at the largest scale.

The trade between countries will increase.

So, the cargo that will be carried across
the Maldives from the Middle East to the Northeast

Asia is not going to reduce.

It's going increase.

The tension is going to increase if free maritime
trade routes are not able to be maintained.

And that is why we have very good relations
with India.

We have also subscribed to the IndoPacific
strategy of the United States in order to

maintain this free freedom of trade, maritime
trade in the Indian Ocean.

Maldives takes their responsibility that geography
has bestowed on us very seriously.

Thank you very much.

There you saw varying statistics indeed.

So, back to you, Dr. Amani, what are the
implications of hydrocarbon.

I know you framed your discussion as human
rights.

But if we can get a little bit technical.

How is Africa going to respond with less trade
in hydrocarbon?

Thank you, Linda.

I think it's unfair, even though we often
say Africa.

But it's also unfair because we talk about
50 plus countries.

Right.

And it's not monolithic.

And you have, I mean, for all these countries
either different levels of development and/or

different levels of development of particular
sectors.

So, here is actually the challenge for organizations
or for supranational organizations like the

African Union.

How to come up with solutions and/or policies
that cater for all these countries?

Now, the African ambition, as stipulate by
the African strategy, is a united integrated

continent including infrastructure.

And benefiting from this incredible resources
and potential that we're having on the continent.

If we talk about energy, for instance, I mean,
you know, that 12% of the hydropotential exists

on the continent.

Huge potential for geothermal in addition
to solar and wind and others.

For the continent to grow as we want it to
grow, then industrialization is also very

much there.

And the ambition is to industrialize and to
transform resources that we have.

For this we need energy and huge amounts of
energy.

So, what we're doing is a special program
for policy harmonization with the lateral

framework, harmonization.

I think it was spoke to by her excellency,
minister for Jordan.

If we are to create this huge energy market
across the continent.

And still I want to stress again that access
is a prime is of prime importance to the

continent.

Access to all.

But also, energy that is reliable and that
could be used in industrialization.

So, a policy of harmonization and a framework
utilization are important to that end.

Now, we also have countries who are either
importers of fossil fuel and those who are

exporters of fossil fuel.

The good news is that the renewable technologies
are now cheaper, more affordable, and more

viable in investment terms.

So, many of our countries, those who are traditionally
have been importing fossil fuels, we see more

and more adoption of these renewable solutions
across the continent.

And even the better news is that producers
and exporters of fossil fuels on the continent

are also aware of the size of renewables and
ability and viability of these industries

and are adopting gradually renewable solutions
so as to produce a very viable renewable way,

growing into sustainability.

And I think this is very smart and it is very
encouraging to see this happening on the continent.

We do recognize as well, you heard this morning,
particularly the producers of coal and so

on, we still have issues with that.

That's why the African Union, we also developed
this actionoriented program for they mentioned

earlier about the decarbonization path
to help our countries find out how to transit.

You know?

How to ensure this transition in the energy
systems in the short, medium and longterm.

I can go on and on.

When it comes to ongrid and offgrid and the
geothermal, all these adapted solutions.

But I think what I wanted to say is that there
is with these 50 plus countries, you would

also have to have a multiple solution and,
I mean, adapt your approach to the variety

of constituencies we are serving on the continent.

That's what's happening now.

And what is encouraging is that our countries
are seeing themselves are seeing themselves

now that with the advances in technology and
they are more and more or increasingly affordable

and increasingly viable.

So, we are adopting them.

Last, but not least, whether it's a producer,
because remember now with the technology,

a simple one individual could also be a
producer of energy.

Whether it's an individual or a multinational,
at the end of the day it's an investment.

And it has to be viable.

And that is why I'm also making the link with
improving the investment climate as a whole

on the environment to make sure that whatever
solution is been there, or whatever investment

is getting into energy is that we have a fertile
and conducive environment that would make

this investment happen.

Very important points.

And I would like to press you a little bit
more on how you sell expensive product to

poor people.

Sometimes when you have investment viability
and you look at your customers, you know,

sometimes it's a disconnect.

So, I would like to maybe in the next round
talk a little bit more about what investors

wanting double digit returns sometimes and
you're finding that's not viable.

But we'll definitely have a chance for you
to react to that comment.

So, Sharon, you spoke earlier about some disconnects
between, you know, the administration and

the actual practical things we have to do
for the transition.

So, I'm going let you pick up from where you
left off around, okay, be that as it may.

What is the United States committing to as
far as this dialogue is concerned?

Well, the United States as a at a national
level remains committed to the Paris Accords

at this point.

The President said he intends to withdraw,
but he cannot do that until 2020.

That's outside of his current term.

See how that goes.

At the moment we are committed.

You see that an energy transition continues
in the United States no matter what.

That despite, again the socalled, you know,
the reversal on this socalled war on coal

which I think is a truly cruel way to talk
about it.

Because that transition's happening no matter
what.

When you talk about winners and losers, madam
minister, those people in our country are

losing.

We need to get a better path for them.

Telling them we're going to end the war on
coal is just wrong.

And the latest reports out of our energy administration
shows that coal has continued to fall in the

United States fairly dramatically.

Natural gas is replacing coal.

Investment in renewables is continuing apace.

And there are many states in the country that
have not slowed down on this transition at

all.

California, which it's good to know I have
a fellow Californian here is the largest,

most populous state in the country and it
will pull the nation in that direction.

So, no matter what is happening in the White
House, or as we say in Washington, inside

that beltway, the country around it is changing.

And all politics are local.

All energy politics are local.

But in the biggest places where the most change
is happening, it's this transition is already

well under way.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

So, we've got about five minutes left in our
session before we go for lunch.

And this is how I would like to spend those
five minutes.

Firstly, I would like to bring Mr. Dialogue
to let us know how we are polling on the geopolitical

session.

While he's coming up, I'm going to do a lightning
round.

Literally 30 seconds where I'll go around,
start with Sharon, and 30 seconds, closing

remarks.

One thing you didn't get to discuss, you want
to react to what your colleagues have said.

It's 30 seconds and then leave.

Start with Mr. Dialogue.

Thanks to you Linda and the panelists.

These guys made BETD2019 the number one trending
hashtag on Twitter today.

So, we beat the YouTubers.

Congratulations yourselves.

I would like to go as directly to the questions
on the Mentimeter.

We had 190 people participate.

Sorry about the WiFi glitch.

I think most of you agreed that we will have
more global trade on energy commodities.

We heard this morning we're going to have
more energy consumption in the future.

That's the expectation.

Some of you are still voting as you can see.

Renewable energy changes value creation and
you think that's going to shift geopolitical

power.

There's overwhelming consent on that in the
room.

Here we have a bit more of an equal spread.

Fossil fuels were a main driver.

What do you think about the impact of renewables
on geopolitics?

And the room is a bit divided on that issue.

Do I have a couple of minutes now for some
Tweets?

Yep?

Can I have a few minutes?

You can take a minute, yes.

Okay, a minute.

Just a minute.

We had several Tweets for minute.

A couple here.

Anna, editor of the beam.

We have journalists in the room.

And you notice that she picks up on the idea
of a just transition.

We had that actually several times from the
press.

So, here is renewable watch.

I know, maybe that's one way to reach the
press is to talk about more of the general

issues.

We also had a lot of Tweets that were not
in English, but fortunately I speak every

language.

So, that's no problem.

Here we have a gentleman talking about the
increase in emissions and being a bit upset

that last year was a record level.

And in Spanish we had a couple of Tweets about
how there's an estimate that energy demand

will rise by 80%.

And so, maybe there's also something going
on there in the Spanishspeaking world.

I'll hand it back to you, Linda.

Thank you very much and see you after the
lunch break.

Thank you very much.

Back to the panel.

This is your closing round.

And we'll make it as quick as possible.

But if you could also just touch a little
bit about the losers.

I know I've begin you 30 seconds.

Heavy topics.

But sum up the panel.

Geopolitics.

What are we doing about the losers?

Starting with you, Sharon.

I think what are we doing about the losers?

I want so say it would be remiss I would
be remiss in not mentioning this is a total

sore spot.

I apologize to my German colleagues.

When we talk about geopolitics, we have to
talk about Nord Stream 2.

Avoid the social media vortex, to be manic-y
about it.

It is not one or the other.

Germany and the winners and losers need to
do what they need to do for their energy security.

And they make a reasonable push for diversification.

But at the same time, we have to be mindful
of who you empower and what the consequences

are in had every decision we make when we
make it.

Thank you.

Dr.Amani?

Reminding everyone that 51% of Africa's population
has no access to energy.

And that's a moral responsibility of all.

I'm also reminding everybody that the continent,
some of the fastest growing economies in the

world are African.

And Africa is providing the whole world with
a huge investment opportunity.

Probably the largest in the whole world.

So, it's also an invitation for everyone to
invest in Africa and change our reality.

Thank you, sir.

Abdulla Shahid: The Maldives are looking for
0 .0012%, that is all we contribute.

But we are a frontline state.

And we are going to face the consequences
at the first round.

But my warning is that it's not going stop
there.

It will affect us all the humanity.

So, let us get cracking.

Thank you.

Minister?

My colleague from Jordan said for the energy
transition that you needed a legal framework.

I agree completely.

So, I think the politicians are really in
the responsibility.

When I say today there were the politicians
mostly female, I think the energy transition

will also be mostly female.

Thank you.

I would like to say things have changed.

There is no more I produce, you consume.

There is no more I have the upper hand.

There is no more you need me.

All of us can produce energy from renewable
energy sources, whatever these sources are.

So, today it's we produce, we consume, and
we need each other.

Change is by few and by more and accepted
bay all.

And let's be the ones who make the change.

I would like to conclude through this transition
there through the legal framework mentioned

that we make sure that we create, and the
market can create new great business models

for ensuring that we are reaching our goals
to getting more renewable into the market.

That's the only way we could get this up in
speed.

We have to make sure that there can be good
business models also for this.

I think I will conclude with that.

Thank you very much.

Excellences, ladies and gentlemen, thank you
very much for joining us on this panel.

I'm sure you agree with me that it was very
thought provocative.

So, if we can give them a collective round
of applause together.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.


