Good morning.

As a child, I was painfully, painfully shy.

Gawky, awkward, afraid of people.

Afraid of this world.

My parents tried to do everything to give
me a little more courage.

They would put me in front of the camera and
sometimes dress me up as a lion thinking I

would get my courage from that.

But I never got my courage from that.

I got my courage the second I picked up a
camera.

All of a sudden, I felt empowered to go out
into the world and engage.

It took the attention away from myself and
allowed me to focus on others.

Photography is really powerful.

And we can transcend language and communicate
these incredible stories.

Here I am in Bangladesh making a film about
mass migration of people being displaced by water.

And now I want to flash back to one of the
first stories I ever covered which was in

a tiny country in west Africa, GuineaBissau,
it was then and still is today one of the

poorest countries on the planet.

And I thought I was going to stay for a couple
of weeks, those weeks turned into months and

those months turned into half a year and what
I discovered really surprised me.

We're given two distinct versions of the continent
of Africa.

On one side, war, famine and plagues.

And the other extreme, you can go on a safari
and see exotic animals.

And what I found was a third narrative.

It was a narrative of people deeply connected
to the natural world.

They understood that their lives depended
on it.

Spirits lived in these trees.

There was a reverence and understanding of
nature.

And to the women, I was a complete mystery.

They couldn't understand how I could be in
my early 20s, no husband, no children, and

I didn't even know how to get water out of
the well.

But they learned to love me, and they took
care of me.

And what I discovered there was how the majority
of people on the planet really live.

There was no electricity, access to running
water.

No doctors.

But there was an incredible beauty and a lot
that I learned there.

And though, you know, though these pictures
in you are a lives may look very different,

that's not what surprised me.

The thing which surprised me the most was
how much we shared.

How much we had in common.

This is Alio, he got a hold of my soap here.

And on my last night in this village the children
were asking me a million questions about my

return home to America.

Ami, do you have cashews in America?

Do you have mangos?

And then we're sitting underneath
the sea of stars and Alio looks up at this

big, beautiful full moon and asks me, Ami,
do you have a moon in America?

And every time I see a full moon, I think
of him standing under those stars.

And it is like this metaphor.

It's like a collective third eye looking down
on this planet and you understand all of a

sudden that we are in this intricate web together.

There is a oneness.

And I've had the privilege now of working
in over a hundred countries, telling stories

of war and conflict and poverty and health.

And slowly these universal truths have emerged
for me.

They are that we are connected.

And all these stories, though they may look
like they're stories about the human condition,

are always, always stories about the natural
world.

You know, we depend on nature for so much
of the outcome of these stories.

And that's why we're all here today.

You know, in a world of 7 billion people,
if we don't start seeing ourselves as part

of the landscape, that saving nature is really
about saving ourselves.

That's critical.

And climate change is no longer just about
polar bears.

It's about every living thing.

I can tell you from firsthand experiences
that people are aware of and deeply frightened

by the impacts of climate change.

The rural poor are already living on the margins
of survival are little room for error.

They're acutely aware of nature's responses.

There are still billions of people on this
planet that don't have access to clean water.

And as droughts become more frequent and are
lasting longer, it's detrimental to human

beings across the world.

But particularly to women who carry an enormous
burden.

Women and girls every single day collectively
spend 200 million hours only collecting water.

You know, this one task is robbing them not
just of their time, but of their potential

as well.

And conventional energy sources like coal
and natural gas are contributors to climate change.

If our planet dies, economic growth of any
kind is really impossible.

And it's not just in the developing world.

I spent a great bit of time going around America
documenting the impacts of climate change

there too.

You know, these people, their lives are both
benefiting and being harmed by the coal industry.

Our concept was to show how coal damages lives
in all three phases of its energy cycle.

When it's extracted, when it's burned, and
with the weight is discarded.

Dig, burn, dump.

In the United States alone, coal kills 13,000
people annually.

And here in Europe, it's 23,000.

Asthma, from poor air quality, triggered by
coal power plants is reaching epidemic proportions.

The economic cost of the health impacts from
coal in Europe alone are valued at $70 billion

per year.

This is the only home we have.

And it belongs to all of us.

I want everyone to experience the beauty and
diversity that exists right now.

From glaciers to deserts, to elephants to
the tiniest of ants.

If we fail to act, we're essentially condemning
all future generations to eternal poverty.

What happens next is in all of our hands.

We can reimagine a different future, and our
choices now are so profound in their impact.

Don't sit this one out.

Be the voice.

Be the messenger.

Engage.

And by the way, it's not just the message
itself, it is the messenger that's also very important.

Every one of us has a role to play.

I want to end with this heartbreaking moment.

This is me last year saying goodbye to Sudan
who was the last male northern white rhino

alive on the planet.

When he passed away, he essentially signaled
the end of an entire species.

And I show this just to say that all of life
we are connected to.

And that's why we're here, right?

We all want to be on the right side of history
and the evidence is absolutely clear.

The key thing is not to fall into the trap
of thinking that this is too big to deal with

or someone else is gonna take care of it.

It's up to all of us.

It's up to you and me.

Thank you so much.


