Thank you, excellencies and ladies and gentlemen
and I joined, you know, in full pleasure the

clapping of thanking Linda Davis for her tremendous
job in being the master of ceremonies.

The mastress of ceremonies for these two days
and also for the kind introduction.

I thank the previous panelists in this wrap
up and closing session.

And I guess it is now my task to close this
successful conference after thrilling debates

on geopolitics, just transition, sector coupling
and digitization.

And after countless and hopefully fruitful
bilateral meetings.

And maybe also agreements and deals.

Minister Maas opened this conference by citing
an impressive young woman.

Change is on the horizon, she said, but to
see that change, we also have to change ourselves.

During this conference we have all witnessed
that the technology to do this is already there.

We can change our energy systems and cut greenhouse
gas emissions drastically if we only muster

the political will and the necessary finance
which is closely connected, I think, to do so.

Bold political decisions are necessary to
overcome the existing challenges.

And this should be an inspiration to all of
us.

Ladies and gentlemen, we close now the BETD
2019.

What do we take away back home?

One thing that stands out and made most headlines,
as Mr.Dialogue said, in international media

is IRENA's outline of a global path to reach
a share of 86% renewable energy in the global

energy mix by 2050.

In this context, it is good news to hear that
business provides ready to provide technical

solutions to every country in the world.

Energy transition proved to be a truly global
issue and this BETD 2019 again outlined the

link between energy, climate and foreign policy.

And panelists talked about the energy transition
can change between states and become a driver

for peace, for example, but not only in the
Middle East.

But as, you know, the BETD is also about convening.

Convening organizations, companies and governments
and people.

Many times, in the past this forum managed
to facilitate contracts and agreements between participants.

So, I hope every one of you has his or her
own promising takeaway.

Or maybe even successful deal to bring back
home.

I am proud to say that this year here in Berlin
a very prominent deal was reached.

IRENA and IEA.

The two international organizations that are
decisive for good and global energy transition

were able to use this forum to agree on the
memorandum of understanding that will lay

the base for close cooperation and consistent
messaging between these two essential organizations.

I'm sure I speak for many in the audience
when I welcome this as a crucial step towards

global cooperation in the field of energy
policy.

This is true, IRENA and IEA.

Ladies and gentlemen, the theme of this year's
conference was new horizons.

We will take away our personal takeaways,
say goodbye and embark on new horizons.

I have to say I followed the worldwide discussion
about robots replacing human beings in the workforce.

Marek Kaminski, thank you for doing this,
reminded me of this, putting the robot on

stage and now waiting there.

Probably the others in the last rows cannot
see it.

But it's still there.

NOA is there.

In fact, I never thought that even we as diplomats
could be affected to be changed into kind

of artificial intelligence or robot machines.

While this piece of furniture here which you
all know and which was wellused during the

conference is, of course, reminds me that
the real threat to diplomats is not robots,

it's really sofas.

Because I also said in many times in my work
as a diplomat for a long time on sofas doing

negotiations and talking.

We have a sofa not only used by diplomats
to sit on, and I will prove that, but it is

a diplomat ins its own right.

The green sofa is the real ambassador for
the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.

It travels the world.

Of course, it does it carbon neutral.

And brings together people as diverse as the
French President Emmanuel Macron and maybe

you who sit there at this conference.

It brings on social media posts reaching many,
many others and it keeps reminding us that

energy transition is the way to go.

Let us see how successful the green sofa has
been in the past year.

Coming in the run up to the BETD 2019 and
now we should see a video.

Here it comes.

Well, I think you agree that we will have
to send the green sofa on a trip for the next year.

And the task is clear, promote the energy
transition and the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.

And I have now to replace the logo.

There's my colleague bringing the new one.

Good.

So, this is it.

Thank you.

With that it is no secret anymore that the
Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue will continue

next year.

And I hope to welcome all of you here again.

We will still have to fix a date.

But if you want to be on the safe side, block
in your calendars the end of March 2020.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, participants,
friends.

Have a safe trip home and stay part of the
dialogue with the green sofa.

Bye, bye.


