So, I'm going to start the conversation by
really just having you set the stage for us

in your own words  what you think
the most striking messages are from this year's

Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.

Thanks, Linda, thanks for the invitation to
come.

I think the most striking thing for me in
this whole conference was the emphasis on innovation.

Every single panel I had the opportunity to
participate in and listen to was focused on

how we can innovate along the edges of this
issue.

Because it's such an urgent issue and
we really need to be working

in the most critical ways to figure out how
we can get solutions.

So, we've got innovation within the technology.

We've got innovation within the context of
markets.

How to help the coal industry be able to exit.

All of those various different things.

But within innovation there's three primary
drivers, I think, that will spur more innovation.

One is the diversity.

We've just heard that 60% of the panel include
women.

On many of the panels there have been inclusion
of high-level ministries from developing countries

which I would like to see actually more of.

I think that would be great.

In addition to the diversity, we need to also
integrate.

I was quite pleased to see the work of the
IASS that's been looking at cobenefits.

How do we have the ministries from different
sectors the ministry from energy talking

to the ministry of health talking to the ministry
of agriculture because it is the cobenefits

and working together that we're going to be
able to find the solutions.

And then the last component I think of innovation,
of course, is opportunity.

And there was a lot of discussion around how
to we get more investment in the field.

So, as a general theme for me that was one
of the biggest things.

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Linda.

I was struck by on one side the feeling of
emergency.

How climate change finally is now perceived
as the major threat by everyone.

And the big numbers we know we have to achieve.

Like phasing out coal in OACD countries very
soon now.

Probably very soon after China.

Going really realizing that 100% renewable
energy is something that we can do in the

system and how electrification can really be used.

And the sectors are difficult, and it was
mentioned during these two days.

The sector where normally you could not do
that.

You could not do zero carbon.

Like heavy industry.

Not only transports.

We know that now we can do that.

And the robot then, Marek will show it, but
also heavy industry and food.

There's these big numbers that we have to
achieve and a number of things appearing in

the real economy, innovation like Anita was
saying.

And anyway, the feeling for the government
that this horizon on net zero by 2050 or after

depending on the level of development is there,
there's an attention there.

We know the numbers.

We know we have to do this.

There's a lot of things coming from the real
economy.

But is there any confidence between the innovators
and entrepreneurs and the government?

Because they have to work together.

And I think, again, I think there is a lot
to be done.

The opportunity, massive opportunity, between
now between the optimism and the trust.

Because if not, we can hear the music which
is, oh, it's too difficult.

It's too difficult to go to net zero by to
2050.

We'll never stop the pipeline of coal power
plants that's going on.

And I think we need that switch because the
solutions are here.

But we have to trust them.

So, that's my take from as a very general
comment.

And at the same time, of course, the situation
is different in Germany, in Poland, in France,

in Europe in general and different from China,
India and there was, of course, a key region

where something has to happen.

And even in US.

But I think this is a common point.

I don't think that a government in Europe
are in a totally different mindset than government

in Vietnam or Philippines or elsewhere.

Different levels, different meaning, different
stage.

Different that can be achieved.

Different demands, of course, because in some
countries demand is relatively flat of energy.

And in some others, they are just increasing
by necessity.

But I think the idea we trust the future;
we can do it.

I think we need a little more and I hope
that next year, but with all the what will

be gathered aren't the year we will be ready
to say, yes.

We can do it.

Fantastic. No, absolutely.

I think that's a really critical point.

And just to add on to that, because there
is a great urgency.

And we were talking in the last session about
resiliency.

I think we need to become more resilient humans.

And that requires a change in mindset.

And I did hear that actually in some of the
other sessions.

Because climate change will lead to very Drastic
weather changes which leads to tremendous

trauma which can further make it more difficult
for, we, as humans, to adapt to the constant changes

We don't like change.

Now, the exciting aspect, though, when we
were talking about innovation which I would

like to see a lot more of, is social innovation.

Like, how do we know more about how we as
humans interact?

How do we collaborate?

How do we build our own resilience and our
own personal agency?

How are we able to transfer information so
you have global technology and solutions but

local adaptations and how to build capacity
locally to innovate?

So, I think this is a huge problem and it's
also is a great opportunity to engage the

social scientists more actively within this
context.

Because the stronger we are as humans, both,
you know, individually, but together, is that's

how we're going to solve this problem.

I totally agree, and I was excited to have
that conversation offered to me.

There are waves in social change and system
change.

Sometimes the innovation comes
from the more the political level.

Because there is a sort of a framing, a theory
of change that comes from the institutional

system and leaders.

And I witnessed that when I prepared the Paris
Agreement and I was, of course, involved in

drafting it.

And negotiating it.

You see that there was a powerful steer from
the governments.

Now we are in a decent position.

And the steer is coming, the pressure is coming
from the society and from the innovators.

And in a way that's why I like what Anita
said.

We need personal agency.

We need to build up.

Because if people think that the change, they
can change in their behavior, in what their

diet, in the way they move, in the way they
look at the future, that will give the second

waves of the political commitment.

And that's why I'm so excited to see this.

I know that in Germany there is a big debate
about the future.

I'm totally fascinated by the fact that these
young people, whoever will demonstrate on

Friday or Saturday, by the way, they're saying
something that is so legitimate.

So strong that we need to respond to them.

And I think no politician can ignore them.

In this dynamic, this positive loop we can
create, no?

The political level that has to make regulation,
decision, investment.

And then the real economy innovation and then
the use.

Asking for that system change.

And I think we are in that phase.

And I think this combination we can innovate.

We want this innovation and we can make it
happen.

For me, it's really what is driving optimism
these days.

Thank you very much. I want to interject a little bit.

You are touching on a lot of points that we
definitely talked about at the conference.

But I just want to just dig a little bit deeper
here.

And I'm going to ask you, Miss Tubiana
to, in your role in the European Climate Organization,

did you anticipate, or did you model out some
of the geopolitical consequences of the Energiwende?

Right?

We had a lot of conversation, I think, yesterday.

There was a lot of refrain with every conversation
talking about the geopolitical changes that

are gonna happen, you know, where, you know,
those language around winners and losers.

And then we were also cautioned not to talk
about losers because that is not going to

be inclusive when you're talking about occupations
that have been, you know, held for hundreds of years.

Right? So, how did this
play out when you were writing sort of this

huge change in the way we live our lives?

I think a big lesson in a way in the success
and failures we have weakness in every country.

We see how much really drastic change has
happened in the economic structure.

Look, I don't know, I can take the example
of my country.

Some industries are still industry in France
where has been dismantled many, many years ago.

And the way countries can manage this transition,
I think everybody can learn from that.

Just I want to come it that point because
we are, of course, facing a big challenge

in the growing demand of energy and particularly
in Asia, south Asia, and southeast Asia.

And how for the moment essential the response
is that we get more call in the system.

And that is, of course, a dead hand for many
reasons.

That is, we would not win the battle with
drastic and dramatic climate change.

and that's good that
this conversation among countries is taking place.

We really tried to steal the discussion that
every country has to understand what this

economy could look like in 2050 if it was
carbon neutral or at least really making really

a deep decarbonization.

And then from there, walk back and see what
kind of a social transition it has to organize ahead.

Because you don't fix things after.

I can take an example of my country with the
carbon tax.

Everybody is talking about here and there.

And the problem is how you fix problem how
you design the solution ahead of the transition

that then the society can buy in and you don't
have this regressive effect of the measures

of the policies.

And for the mining sector, for the
people who are working in coal power plants.

The demand for energy.

You have to have the solution ready.

You have to have plans.

So, the geopolitics, of course, you have the
demographic, you have the demand, you have

the resources there in coal.

But at the same time, you have very, very
cheap renewable energy available.

And we know that we need infrastructure, we
need investment.

We need teamwork to make this investment policy.

But at least everyone needs to plan, and we
have to discuss altogether the plans.

And I think you have to accelerate that.

Yep. Fantastic, thank you very much.

Now, Dr.Shankar, I want you to pick up
from where Miss Tubiana left it off.

I know you work very specifically, and you
are very passionate about the global north

and the global south.

Especially as far as, you know, inclusivity,
you know, but still maintaining sort of the

diversity of the two regions.

So, could you tease out exactly what you mean
by the social innovation?

We heard that yesterday about energy as a
human right.

And an energy transition that
leaves people behind is not really a true transition.

I think energy justice is a word that we heard
yesterday.

Climate justice are words that were thrown
about yesterday.

So, could you tie all that together?

That's a lot of words to try together.

But what I want to say around this is we have
to be pushing at multiple different levels.

I was very excited to hear about the young kids who are standing for their right for climate Justice.

We have seen it in the United States after
a number of school shootings.

It was the young folks that came together
and started voicing their concerns.

And while at the national level we haven't
had those many changes in the gun laws, it's

the state and local levels that have changed
numerous laws.

And that's part of the solutions.

And again, at various different levels.

The other thing that is important to me is
local leadership.

And leadership for especially within the
case of renewables in those countries where

maybe 25% of the population have access to
electricity currently.

We have a great opportunity to lead, for example,
in Kenya on offgrid solutions.

Because ultimately once the developing country's
governments are more involved in coming up

with the solutions, they're more like lib
to be sustainable within their context.

I really would like to be able to see a lot
more solutions coming from the developing

countries that we can all use globally as
well.

I personally feel that will we haven't done
enough around social innovation within the

climate space.

There's more that's coming up.

And I know that there are scientists investigating
in this.

But I think we're still doing business as
usual.

If you look at current behavior change programs,
they're still very much focused on knowledge

and attitudes.

But if you look at behavior change, there's
a huge gap between knowledge and actual action.

And that's because you have to go through
what it is to be human.

What you say to yourself, how you feel, are
you afraid, are you traumatized?

Do you have hope, or do you not have hope?

And that's where I think a lot of the innovation
can occur now because we can take advantage

from neuroscience, from psychology in terms
of what really promotes sustainable behavior change.

And incorporate that throughout the development
sphere and incorporate that within our conversations

around energy.

For example, we know that the selfhelp groups
are ubiquitous.

Well, in the developing country space.

But also, potentially in the global north.

Using the social agency, kind of the collective
agency of the social networks, maybe an ideal

conduit to convey information and figure out,
well, how do we make better choices?

What are those choices anyway and how do they
affect my daily life and how I live?

Thank you very much.

So, while you give some of your response to
this, I would like one of you to comment on

investment flows.

You know, one of the numbers we're hearing,
there's a lot of investment in the trillions

of dollars that need to flow into the Energiwende,
you know.

Just some comments around, you know, some
takeaways we can take home.

I think we could use a new exactly on the
mindset of investors.

Why this money is not flowing?

I can tell, I have in many discussions, by
the way, we had a fantastic program that we

developed after the summit in France together
with Germany, France and UK and philanthropy

to team up on the funding for Southeast Asia
going from coal to clean.

As a way to change the mindset of private
investors.

And I was struck by the fact that even if
the solar electricity, solar, the wind, the

batteries now, we know that is cheaper and
cheaper and cheaper.

And at the same time, when you talk to investors,
they say, oh, it's very risky.

But why are they thinking that?

If things are risky it's not true, because,
again, just it's happening everywhere and

again the costs are there, the economy is
there.

But they don't believe in it because they
feel that something will happen that's finally

safer to invest in coal.

That's now less so.

But the oil and gas is still a very, very
good business.

And that's where you find the portfolio nowadays.

So, if we have to change the expectation of
the future, because the trillion will flow.

And if we don't change that, the risk premium
they are asking to move a little bit and to

do their business differently is so high that,
yes, renewable energy is expensive because

they are afraid.

So, if it's a price of fear that they want
the economy to pay.

And it's not justified.

So, I think it's good to have many, many more
examples on grid electricities in the developing

countries that they can truly bring because
you are doing much more than that in Europe,

for example.

Or just examples that it is an economic benefit
to really use that.

And that's not a risky business.

The risky business is on the other side.

But still the mindset has not totally changed.

So, we have to find a financial mechanism.

Many people are working at that.

But we have to change the mindset.

Yeah.

I totally agree.

And we also have to look at different financing
models.

And who people are going to be willing to
invest in.

We did a study around clean cook stove entrepreneurs
and we found that women sold three times than

their male counterparts.

These are micro entrepreneurs.

They don't have access to the kind of funding
or financing this they could need to build

their own livelihoods.

So, we have a great opportunity to through
climate activities be able to promote economic

empowerment of the bottom, you know, of the
base of the pyramid.

To promote gender equity.

The majority of the household managers of
energy are women.

If you look at and at least in the clean
cooking sector the womenheaded households

are more likely to uptake technology.

So, we have to take advantage of what we know
and diversify.

And we need to collaborate.

And we need to have the opportunity.

I totally agree and that's good that you mention
these different levels of decision making.

At the local level now is many times more
innovative.

So, cities, I can take many examples in Germany
and France and the UK that want to go further,

has innovative solution.

Wants to borrow money to invest.

And at the same time, I think we have on the
central government, the central financial

institution to do the job properly.

Because it will be very difficult for the
global if Europe doesn't deliver on its job.

If we are not complying with the targets,
we have fixed.

If we are not showing that the zero-carbon
economy, we would be living in.

That's where we have a huge responsibility.

Because we cannot say that we can't do it.

That's not possible.

So, that's the only pressure I would make
on government and these financial institutions.

We have to deliver on that.

Because if not, it's just totally unfair globally.

Thank you very much.

Well, I have to say we can, you know, continue
talking about this very, very exciting subject,

but I'm afraid our time is up.

But what I'm hearing as, you know, being advised,
the call to action from my two panelists here

are certainly when we come for the Berlin
Energy Transition Dialogue 2020, we have to

have change.

We have to have moved the needle.

Because I'm hearing we have to have social
innovation.

Definitely integrate the human rights side
of it.

We have to have political innovation because
we've heard a lot that is required.

That comes from the political will to really,
really grease the wheels of the Energiwende.

And finally, we have to have financial innovation,
so we are actually having a different conversation

next year than the one we had today.

So, ladies and gentlemen, your excellencies,
please join me in thanking my wonderful panelists.

We could talk a lot more about this, but this
is all the time we have for today.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Thank you, thank you, thank you.


