Very good morning to all of you.

Ministers, dear colleagues, dear friends,
a very good morning to all of you and today

I thought after all these very impressive
speeches we heard from the political leaders,

from the business community and others.

I give an Xray of the global, where we are
today.

Some numbers here.

I have six slides to show you that we actually
are, and how critical is the action today.

We are at the IEA; we are very fortunate.

We have all the energy data at our fingertips.

And at the end of every year or the beginning
of the following year, we look at the how

did global energy system behave?

And then we look at the year 2018, last year,
ladies and gentlemen, what we have seen is

the global energy demand last year increased
the highest in the last decade.

Very strong growth of global energy demands.

Why?

Because global economy increased very strongly.

Now, the question is, which fields did contribute
to this growth?

Are those fields you would like to see or
some others?

We'll get the picture.

We see that almost half of that growth of
global energy demand was coming from natural gas.

Followed by renewables, followed by oil and
others.

This is what happened in the year 2018.

But 70% of the energy demand was met by fossil
fuels last year.

What are the implications of that for the
CO2 emissions?

We all want to see decline of the CO2 emissions.

All the leaders said action, action, action.

What does action mean?

Reduction of emissions.

What United Nations told us: 1.5 degrees.

Which means we need a big decline of the emissions.

But I look at the numbers.

When I look at the numbers, year very 14,
'15, '16, at least there was a flat emissions

increase.

But last year when I was here, I told you
in '17 we have seen another increase of emissions.

And I asked myself and to you here last year,
if our 2018 numbers would be better.

But I can show you that the 2018 global emissions
hit a historical high.

So, what does this mean, ladies and gentlemen?

There is a growing disconnect between political
statements, targets and what is happening

in the real life.

This is very important, and it shouldn't be
taken with the very attractive way of talking

about the trends and all of this is what we
want to see.

It's different.

But what is happening is different.

We have to acknowledge what is happening today.

And here the biggest problem, biggest driver
of the emissions last year was coal generation

in the world.

Onethird of the CO2 emissions came from coal
generation.

And as such, it is the largest source of emissions.

Even higher than land use.

Something to take note of.

Now, we also look at the electricity.

Global electricity demand is growing strongly.

Energy demand increases, but electricity increases
two times higher than energy demands.

Very strong.

And the question is, where does the generation
come from?

And again, in the year 2018, we saw that the
renewables, especially solar and wind, made

big inroads.

Mainly as a result of decline in costs.

Great news.

Renewables are getting cheaper and cheaper.

Having said that, it covers renewables, together
with hydrogen and others, only half of the

growth in electricity generation.

Other half, from something else.

Therefore, there's a lot of work to do for
my dear colleague Francesco la Camera who

is an excellent leader.

Who is a wonderful colleague to work with
us, to work with the IEA, to make the renewables

even stronger?

Now, ladies and gentlemen, you may want to
know, renewables are growing.

We are telling it all the time.

What is the share of different fuels in the
world?

Now, when you look at the picture, it is really
different than our speeches.

Today about 40% of the electricity generation
in the world comes from coal.

Followed by gas and others.

Which means still twothirds of the electricity
generation comes from fossil fuels.

And the share of solar and wind put together
is still lower than 10%.

Put that into context.

So, a lot of work to do here.

Despite the decline in costs please, please,
please, let us put the things in a context

to understand the real dimensions of the challenge
we have in front of us.

Now, renewables are growing.

They will grow.

Because they are getting cheaper and many
governments, such as in Germany, are giving

a lot of support to that.

But not only Germany, but many countries around
the world.

So, this is good news.

But there's only one challenge.

At least one.

Which is solar and wind, their availability
is bound by the nature.

By the weather conditions.

So, the issue is, how do we integrate the
solar and wind in the electricity assistance

so that we don't have accidents and we integrate
them in the most economic way?

When we look at the countries one by one,
the share of solar and wind in the electricity

generation, if it is less than 10%, it doesn't
pose a major challenge.

Major problem.

Because with the existing system, you can
accommodate them between the electricity systems.

But when their share increases, such as the
one in, for example, in Germany or in the

European Union in general, about 25%, now
you have to be careful.

You have to be careful how to integrate them
into the electricity systems without creating

any challenges if there is no wind.

Or if there's no sun.

So, therefore we need to invest in the systems
which make our power generation, power transmission

distribution much more flexible.

And we know that the share of numbers will
increase.

We hope that the share of the numbers will
increase.

And this challenge will be much more even
more pronounced.

It is a major, major issue.

So, ladies and gentlemen, for the governments,
you may think there is only one homework to

increase the share of renewables.

There's only one.

There is another one.

To integrate the renewables in the systems
in the right way and create flexibility in

the systems.

Otherwise we may very well have some difficulties
for the renewables which are extremely important

for our fight against climate change.

This is an emergent issue.

And the German government and the International
Energy Agency are organizing a high-level

event in Berlin, the 27th of September, to
look at the implications of system integration.

Together between us we have another bedrock
to fight against climate change.

Which is energy efficiency.

Mr.Kaeser mentioned the critical importance
of energy efficiency.

And we look every year at how the energy efficiency
patterns look like.

To be honest with you, once again, I have
bad news.

Global energy efficiency in 2018 got weaker.

We wanted to see it higher than previous years.

But it got weaker.

Why?

Policies in many countries are getting weaker
and the lower energy prices also gave an input

to see low energy efficiency patterns.

This is very worrying.

This is very worrying.

The energy efficiency doesn't get the attention
that it deserves from the governments and

others.

I want to give you one example.

Building sector.

Building, ladies and gentlemen, today in the
world are responsible about onethird of the

global CO2 emissions.

Onethird.

What we call the emergent energy in the buildings.

And with the support of the German government
we are releasing a report today, our director,

is going to talk about it.

About the buildings.

I can give you one number which is very, very
worrying.

At least for me.

Today, as we speak now, two out of three buildings
built in the world, constructed in the world,

has no building codes and efficiency standards.

Two out of three.

And these buildings will be with us 50, 60
years and waste a lot of energy.

So, how can we, without efficiency improvements,
solve this challenge?

Had having stronger efficient standards is
a critical question.

My last slide is perhaps for me the most important
one because in the terms of climate change,

I consider this issue as a blind spot of the
international climate change debate.

When it comes to climate change, we talk about
the new renewable plants, efficiency and others.

But there is one very important issue that
I believe not discussed is it is perhaps for

the numbers it is the most important one.

Which is the following: With the current nation
contribution, current policies, the world

is perfectly on track for a temperature increase
close to 3 degrees Celsius.

Which will definitely change the rather fragile
equilibrium of our planet.

But what we all want to see to bring the temperature
increase in line with the Paris Agreement.

Now, I asked my colleagues, I told them the
following.

Leave aside what we are building now, what
we build in the future.

The existing energy infrastructure today.

Power plants, factories, buildings, how much
CO2 they will emit in the next 25 years.

Existing infrastructure.

And how much of the budget allowed us in Paris
they are going to eat up.

How many percent of that?

With the existing funds.

Forget renewables or clean, just the existing
ones.

We look at this power plantbypower plant,
factorybyfactory.

And the hundreds of people that die a year.

Because it's very important.

What we have found out is the existing infrastructure
of today, what we have, power plants, factories,

buildings, already eat up more than 90% of
the emissions allowed to us.

So, it means we have no allowance to build
anything, use anything as of now.

The case which is not renewables.

If you live here, you cannot take a car or
a plane.

Finished.

Unless, unless we intervene and change this
picture.

The existing infrastructure.

And what is the biggest part of the existing
infrastructure?

It is by far coal and coal in developing Asia.

Now, in Germany we discuss you discuss
the colleagues here, it is since months and

months a big discussion.

And Minister Altmaier and his team is making
a heroic work.

Hopefully for a successful outcome.

Ladies and gentlemen, the German coal, what
we are discussing, is about some of us.

And we are talking about the 2,000 gigawatts,
2,000 gigawatts, and a big chunk of it

this is very important big chunk of it
in the countries that people earn below $2

per capita.

$2 per capita.

Who will dare to go to Indonesia, to Thailand,
to India, to Philippines, to tell the utilities

to shut it down which is providing electricity
to the villages?

It is not fair.

How are we going to compensate this?

It's a major issue.

Second, in Europe, and we have coal plants
as well.

But those plants are over 42 years old.

They are old and close to retirement.

But in Asia, we have a very young fleet of
11 years old.

It didn't pay back.

Who is going to finance it?

I think this is the major issue.

We cannot close our eyes to the existing lack
in infrastructure.

So, therefore, in my view, we have two jobs,
ladies and gentlemen.

One, what we build, new things, should be
as sustainable as possible.

But it's not enough.

Second, we have to intervene the existing
unsustainable infrastructure and to make it

sustainable.

Only doing the first one will not be enough
at all.

And here, we shouldn't forget the issue.

Africa is responsible only 1.8% of the CO2
emissions but gets the biggest hit from the

climate change.

You have seen what happened in Mozambique
very recently.

So, we have to be very careful there to put
part of the challenges in front of us and

the International Energy Agency, we look at
the renewables, efficiency, carbon storage,

hydrogen, I'm turning to Japan now.

These are all very important technologies.

We do not have the luxury to get put one
aside.

I would like to thank the German government
once I would like to thank the German government

once again for inviting the IEA here and finish
my words with one appeal to all of you.

It's not from the IEA, it is from me.

We all have favorite technologies.

Some of us like renewables.

Some of us wind, solar, hydro.

Hydrogen power, electric cars.

We push that.

We push our country's priorities.

But the climate change challenge is very big.

And it is huge.

Therefore, I believe it is not the time to
boost our egos, but to reduce the CO2 emissions.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.


