Your royal highness princess Abze Djigma,
Miss Schwarzelühr-Sutter, have a safe trip home

excellencies, ladies and gentleman,
Mitigating climate change is a matter of saving

humankind because we are already seeing that
it becomes a reality that greenhouse gases

are a record high, biodiversity is dwindling
and our resources are overexploited; this

goes for water and for nature, for soil.

And unless we do something to change that
hundreds of millions of people are going to

live in poverty, there will be more crop failures,
there will be more disasters linked to the

weather, we have just heard from my colleague
from the ministry of environment.

This is why we really need to put the Paris
Agreement into practice, otherwise we will

not be able to actually reach the 2 degrees
Celsius target.

But we also have to realize that only 17 of
184 countries are on course and Germany is

not amongst them.

Energy accounts for around two thirds of global
greenhouse gas emissions and around 80 % of

all carbon emissions, and this is why work
has to start in the energy sector.

And the key decision as to whether this will
work out or not will be made in the developing

world and emerging countries.

But we also have to realize that billion people
still don't have access to electricity and

that 9 out of 10 coalfired powerplants under
planning are being built in developing countries.

There are growing middle classes and they
want to consume more and want to be mobile,

but at the same time none of this means that
we in the industrialized world can just rest

on our laurels.

We are still responsible.

We have our responsibility because for 200
years we have been fueling our prosperity

on fossil fuels.

So we have responsibility to show that it
is possible to have a good life without actually

polluting the world with CO2 emissions.

It is possible to have successful economy
at the same time.

We also have to support developing countries
as they develop in a way that is climate compatible;

and that we also support them to adjust to
the consequences of climate change.

In 2017, Germany provided 6.7 billions euros
for the international work to mitigate climate change

With all modesty, I can still say that this
puts us in first place in the EU.

And more than 80 % of funds that have been
used for this come from my ministry's fund,

from the development ministry.

This means that the development ministry is
doing a lot to promote climate compatible

development.

Economic development that goes without emissions.

We are supporting the sector in approximately
50 countries, which makes us one of the largest

bilateral donors - providers of aid in the
sector of energy.

In 2017, we provided 2.7 billion euros, so
we are funding the global energy transition.

For instance, as we provide funding for one
largest geothermal plants in Kenya, we are

also providing funding for solar powerplants
in India, Morocco and Zambia, and all these

projects are conducted in cooperation with
local companies.

Africa can really be the green continent of
this world.

Federal minister Dr Müller launched initiative
in 2017 that is called The Green People's

Energy for Africa initiative.

It provides funding for distributed renewable
energy systems which are low-cost, easy to

integrate and highly scalable due to the use
of new technologies.

They are also providing funding for local
stakeholders and private investors.

This makes it easier for people in rural areas
to have their energy needs met and to get

access to energy.

At the same time, we also build local value
chains and jobs, local jobs.

This makes it possible for young people in
their countries to actually do their jobs.

We also would like to see a structured transformation
of the energy sector.

If we are to actually make the Paris Agreement
a reality, we need to step up our efforts.

Because what we have been doing so far is
not enough.

This goes for the expansion of renewable's
capacity and also for energy efficiency.

This is why we would like to link up renewable
energies and energy efficiency with the NDCs,

that is the Nationally Determined Contributions.

In our NDC partnership we're supporting developing
countries and also emerging economies as they

help mitigate climate change through their
public sector spending, through economic policy,

agriculture policy.

More than 100 members within the partnership
are sharing the expertise and supporting each

other on global climate mitigation.

So, these are governments, international organizations
and civil society.

They want to be more ambitious.

The important thing is to better align the
energy and climate targets of countries so

that we can reduce climate change to 2 degrees
Celsius.

Ideally to 1.5 degrees Celsius.

So, a political framework is to set up to
help expand the use of renewables and fund

energy efficiency.

This includes a global some.

By 2050 we want to decarbonize all of the
worlds' economies, or nearly decarbonize them,

requiring innovation and new technology.

And, of course, we need to make inroads on
sector coupling which means climate renewable

energies and mobility and cities must be regarded
as elements of a single system.

This really makes the NDC partnership a reality.

It brings us a new spirit of cooperation.

And there are already 40 Developing nations
that are already benefiting from this system.

Germany and its partner countries are showing
that it is possible.

We're demonstrating that we can address climate
change, this challenge.

In Morocco alone we havele00 megawatts of
wind energy and a thousand of solar energy.

We are providing energy to the new grids.

This is why I would like to thank the BETD.

We are demonstrating that it is in fact possible
that we can really overcome the challenge

of global warming.

All of you have come here with your energy,
you bring your powers to innovate and your

creativity to this task.

You are addressing this task and I would like
to thank you very much for that.


