Ministers, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
friends.

I have to say that I'm very glad and honored
to be here with you today.

And I I'm thankful to the German government
for inviting me to be here.

As has been said, it is my first engagement
out of my home in Abu Dhabi.

In fact, it's my second day of work.

And it seems to me so natural that I am here
where IRENA is having its second house, second home

And where we have German host our center for
innovation and technology.

So, it is really familiar to be here.

And I wish to remember that just ten years
ago there was the conference to establish IRENA.

Just here in Germany.

So, a very short period.

And now in this short period more than 180
countries are engaging in the work of IRENA.

So, most of the U.N. members are part of our
work.

So, it was excellent to hear the speech from
Fatih.

All many things that are has been said as
part also of my presentation.

What I can say that's we are experimenting.

That the energy transition is in place.

So, we are experimenting.

The market is leading to the transformation.

We can see, as 2018, as marked as the eight
years we had the seventh year we had the

capacity come from renewable instead of traditional
sources.

63% of the new capacity added in 2018 are
coming from renewables.

And what we can say, that this is just for
the market and political action.

As Fatih is saying, the price of the renewable
is declining, and this makes more to invest

in renewable.

We have an expanding use of electric vehicles.

We have all the signs that the energy transition
is in place.

What is the problem that we have to face?

It is happening too slow.

As I have seen in the graph from Fatih, we
are too slow from the sustainable path.

We are really out of the path that we have
to follow to achieve the goals of the Paris

Agreement.

Energy demand has been growing.

And the CO2 emissions start again to grow.

And I think that there are two special parts
of our planet.

Africa has been mentioned.

South-East Asia.

Where the energy demand is growing at a pace
that is double China.

So, it makes clear that as it is now, the
trend that the market has in some way set

is not sufficient.

So, we have to do more.

So, we need the work of the government.

I want to show that also in the country we
are where the political I will just say the

political address is not perfectly in line.

Geo and renewable are always declining in
the price and the market is going up.

This is like I just said from the Solar Association
of the United States.

Also, there where we have new a presidency
that is not so climate friendly.

The market is responding in the right way.

But I repeat, too slowly.

So, what is the answer?

We may find this report that I'm very proud
to present today.

The roadmap of the 50, the last creation of
the work of IRENA.

Our answer is to invest in the electrification
and on any electrification that is fed by

renewable.

To stay in line with the Paris Agreement,
the only instrument that we have, the only

one, is renewable.

Work in renewable, we can gain a reduction
of 7075% in 2015.

And we had as has been correctly said by Fatih,
also the energy efficiency, we get 90% of

what we need.

So, we have to be clear.

And this also has to be a clear message that
we want to send to the meetings like the DG20

and others that renewable is the only answer
we have if we want to be serious in this exercise.

Just to give you an idea, in 2016, as you
say, the respect of the energy generation.

The part of coming from the electrification,
electricity is very small.

So, we have to get, if you want to achieve
our result, at least what is coming from our

report, is to get at least 50% of generation
be on electricity.

And a larger part of this gain in electricity
has to be to come from renewable.

Possible this slide could be a little bit
unclear to understand what is at the stake today.

Here is the natural share of renewable energy
with respect to the final consumption.

You know that in the reference case we have
a growth that is not sufficient to get to

our goals in accordance with the Paris Agreement.

Paris Agreement achievement.

So, we have to increase our growth of the
share of renewable energy in respect of the

energy consumption.

So, we have to drive at six folds growth in
the share of renewable.

And this is something that the number gives
the idea of the efforts that we are going

to be engaging.

And we have in this light also the reference
to the energy intensity improvement.

That has to be at least 3.2%, more than 3%,
with respect to the number that Fatih has

correctly shown.

So, what kind of investment do we need?

Do we need an investment from now to 2030
or more than 110 trillion?

But this means up to 20% of our GDP.

But we have to take into consideration with
respect to this number what will be what we

are going to save.

First of all, the subsidies that we are giving,
about 1015 trillion of subsidies to the goal

generation or the coalrelated generation.

So, we have studied a model where we are trying
to take into consideration all the different

aspects of the problems that we are confronted
with.

And so, using a model where all the economy,
also the employment and the welfare are maybe

considered.

And giving us the chance to say that if we
are going to the path that is the path that

we are suggesting, we are with our roadmap
2015, we can say for every dollar spent in

investment, we were paid back from three to
seven times.

So, that's making evidence how convenient
it is to take another road.

Or at least go with more strength in the road
that the market is already trying to go through.

Our estimate is that the global GDP will not
decrease just because we will have more clean

energy.

The GDP will grow.

This means that this is not only a question
of ethical or environmental question.

It's an economic question.

Now say that the geopolitical transformation
that is related to these facts make clear

that this is the only road that we have to
go through if you want to have an economic

development that can be also fair.

And the choice of renewable is also a fair
choice.

Just to see that it's not only the GDP growing,
but also the employment.

So, if we invest in clean energy, we will
get more employment.

And this is very important because we have
to take into consideration when we work for

a clean energy that we have to balance and
make clear the transformation is a winwin.

We have existed with our people reacting and
we have to explain exactly how the transformation

is going to be fair.

And the answer, Fatih said, is the only solution
that we have if we want to ensure that the

growth that we need to have a more fair world
has to be compatible with the environment

and the capacity of the environment to support
our life.

So, what are the recommendations coming from
our report?

We are modernizing the system for the renewable energy age and perfectly in line with Fatih talking

about the system that has to be capable to
be engaged in support of the renewable energy

into the system.

So, has to be flexible.

And I have to say that in one of our recent
reports, IRENA showed more than 30 different

possibilities to ensure this flexibility.

And that is the existing one.

And we also suggest a new way out is possible
to ensure flexibility in the system.

We have to align energy policy and climate
objectives.

And we have to work to unlock investment and
scale up renewable energy projects.

My last slide is concerning IRENA.

I think that we all are called to do more.

It means that also IRENA has to do more.

What I will work in the next weeks and months
is to ensure that IRENA has to be more present

on the field.

We want to ensure our member states that we
will be side by side with them to ensure the

ownership in their energy policies.

Have them to have a dialogue with the multilateral
institution, institutional and financial.

We'll be there to try to help them and set
clear rules on procurement, on bidding, trying

environmental legislation and other kind of
legislation just to make them able to attract

private investment.

But without losing the ownership.

Because ownership is the only way we can really change the way we act in many parts of the world.

Thank you very much.


