Ladies and Gentlemen,
Ministers, Peter Altmaier, Miss Vitale, Mister Kaeser,

Mister Birol, Mister La Camera,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

I beg your understanding for the fact that
you were not able to fully see the opening film.

But that has been our first contribution to
saving energy.

The second half will be shown in the course
of the day.

Ladies and Gentleman,

Change is on the horizon, but to see that
change we also have to change ourselves.

I think that this is for the first time that
I am beginning my speech with a quote that

is not from a great philosopher, an award-winning
scientist or a respected politician.

No, it is from a 16 year-old-schoolgirl, Greta
Thunberg.

That
is week after week Friday after Friday countless

places across the globe have been showing
us the responsible ones.

They call upon us to do more for climate protection.

They call upon us not only to acknowledge
realities but also to

change things to change ourselves.

It is about our very existence.

For quite some time now climate policy has
been more than environmental policy.

And ever since Fridays For Future it has become
an issue and a topic of social policy, too.

It extends to 
an element of foreign policy just as much

as it involves economic and health policy.

For climate change has resulted in an ever-growing
number of droughts, forrest fires, floods

and extreme weather events and they occur
with high intensity.

In many places of the world, people are losing
their livelihood, they're forced to flee.

The fight for increasingly scarce resources
is escalating.

And in such, a situation, the likelihood as
we unfortunately have been forced to realize,

the likelihood of violent conflict is also
rising.

Climate change enhances risk.

Especially in context that are already fragile.

It is a threat to peace and stability of regions
all over the world.

And this is why we decided to make the security
political impact of climate change one of

the priorities of our presidency, of our membership
in the security council

of the United Nations in the next two years.

We are cooperating especially closely with
the small island states for which climate

change has long since become an immediate
existential threat.

Thus, I'm especially delighted to be able
to welcome my colleague from the Maldives,

welcome to you, dear colleague.

Ladies and gentlemen has also been on my agenda
during the my visits abroad.

Only a few weeks ago I met the Mayor of Freetown
in Sierra Leone, Yvonne.

She would have every reason to complain for
her city is facing an enormous environmental problem.

Roughly a thousand people died a year ago
when an avalanche of mud bulldozed Freetown.

On top of that, Freetown is groaning under
enormous amounts of waste.

A floating diesel power plant whose chimneys
release dark clouds

and fumes that paint the blue sky black.

However, the Mayor was not complaining when
she talked to me, she spoke about opportunities,

about change, about sustainable possible and
how Freetown might be able to benefit from that.

Given this anything but easy situation in
this anything but easy city, she was able

to design her own climate program and said
to me, tell me more about it.

Ladies and gentlemen, of course it's always
a bit surprising that when you talk to someone

in a foreign country, someone who speaks a
foreign language, you realize that he's using

a German term.

I think this has happened more than once to
a German beer brewer who was approached with

regard to the German beer purity law.

Because that is, in a way, no matter where
you go, people think of it as being typically German.

And the same has been for the Energiewende,
the energy transition.

Roughly 50 in the world participate in our
conference, which shows that the German Energiewende

has been a global edge transition, a global
Energiewende.

More money today is invested in renewables
than in fossil fuels.

By the end of the mid2020s, global projection
is going down.

The beginning of the end of the age of fossil
fuels has long since begun.

The energy transition is going to have a majority
political impact.

On the one hand, this is going to be a positive
impact because renewables will be available

on a global scale.

However, this also means that that there will
be fewer conflicts about access to fuels.

States will then also be less able to use
their energy resources as a means to exert

pressure on other countries.

But there will not only be winners and we
have to bear that in mind.

In fact, into our calculations.

What is going to happen to those countries
who depend already today on a very large extent

on the export of natural oil and natural gas.

The risk of economic crisis and thus also
the threat of political instability might

rise quickly in that regard.

Thus, we should have an interest in making
sure that when business models of countries

and states collapse, this does not necessarily
trigger a conflict.

And the best way to prevent such a development
is to invest here and now in competitive renewables.

The federal government and the German business
community is ready to act as your partner

in order to support and diversify your different
business models and I trust that there will

be more said on this subject matter when he
takes the floor from the point of view of industry.

Ladies and gentlemen, roughly 1 billion people
are still without access to electricity today.

Renewables can make a contribution towards
quickly reducing that number.

The energy transition provides many countries
to take a development leap.

Existing dependencies can be reduced and the
growing need for electricity can be reduced.

The transition is also a giant driver of growth.

In Germany alone we will replace more than

40 gigawatts from coal power plants and replace them by renewables.

Other countries may have more complex and
more ambitious plans.

This will mean investments, new jobs, and
economic growth.

Already today more than 10 million people
are employed in the sector of renewables and

that figure is undoubtedly going to markedly
rise in the future.

Because of that great economic potential,
we have to be very much on our toes watching

that this growth market remains open for companies
from all over the world and the necessary

technologies are available for everyone.

We stand up for global standards and we place
our trust in that regard in international

organizations like IRENA and the IEA when
it comes to setting standards.

Thus, I'm delighted about the fact that Francesco
la Camera is here with us today.

And also, as this happens to be his first
official trip since he became Director General of IRENA.

The global energy transition requires regional
networks and integration, let's not forget that.

Our energy is to come from wind power.

However, the wind doesn't blow 24 hours seven
days a week and the sun doesn't shine without end.

As long as the storage technologies are not
developed sufficiently,

we have to transport energy across long distances.

We have to integrate our grids and networks
more than has been in Europe.

Also, with our north African neighbors.

In Germany we have already made impressive
progress, ladies and gentlemen.

Roughly 40% of the electricity produced come
from renewables today.

That is but a first step.

Much work lies ahead.

Let us think of the reduction in the emissions
in the sectors of transport and heating, the

fossil fuel phase out and the grid expansion.

But despite all of these challenges, we are
confident,

and we believe that we have chosen the right path.

We have to be successful in further increasing
the share of renewables and while maintaining

our country as an industrialized country with
a high level of posterity.

For many countries, Germany is seen as the
pioneer of the energy transition.

We will put that part to good use in order
to up the international speed.

I'm not telling you anything new, ladies and
gentlemen, when I say what I'm going to say now.

But I believe it cannot be stressed enough.

It's really amazing to see where you have
to make that point wherever you travel.

But global challenges cannot be tackled single
handedly.

Climate change does not stop at borders.

Neither should the energy transition.

Thus, we have to cooperate ever more closely
at all levels in the field in the framework

of the United Nations, at the level of states,
but also at the level of regions, of cities

and local communities and everybody has to
be taken on board.

Politicians, civil society, industry, and
science and the academia.

Thus, use this conference, benefit from the
many side events during the Berlin Energy Week.

Get to know people.

Make contact.

Develop ideas in order to globalize the energy
transition in the best sense of the term.

Be a part of the global Energiewende.

Thank you very much indeed.

A very warm welcome.

And I'm happy to now hand the floor to Peter
Altmaier.


