Wow.

What fascinating pictures.

They're moving altogether.

I think we should send those pictures to those
people who actually say climate change is

made up by fake news media.

What it shows us is that it is our responsibility
to save that world.

And it also shows us something else it's worthwhile
to bring those people out of poverty and have

the life we have in Germany and in the developed
economy.

So, it is a twosided topic of the coin.

Dear minister Maas, dear minister Altmaier, excellences, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends.

I see many good old friends and if I say old friends, I do not mean by age.

I think it's pretty clear that we live in exciting times.

Very exciting times.

The coming decades definitely will likely
be the most dynamic decades in history and

of all times.

Geopolitics is increasingly driving geoeconomics.

In economic item P in economic terms, we are
on the verge of the revolution which definitely

will see changes which are unprecedented in
both.

A magnitude and in speed.

And then geopolitics gets tougher.

Every nation is well advised.

And I mean welladvised to provide and control
its critical infrastructure and here obviously

energy is on the top of the agenda.

And what about industrial priorities?

All industrial revolutions, all three of them,
and secondly the fourth one too, the use of

power, the use of electrification has been
playing an essential role.

And the force in this revolution is no exception.

It is an energy revolution.

And there's two realities which will shape
this energy revolution.

The first one, and it is a reality, the first
one is climate change.

Today sea levels, ocean temperatures and the
concentration of greenhouse gases is as high

as it was ever before.

We are seeing more and more extreme weather
events.

So, there is no doubt, no doubt that
planet Earth needs our attention.

Because we do not have a planet B. And it's
very good to see those movements, especially

by the younger generation, because they have
a point.

It's their future.

It's their future.

However, this is not just about Fridays future,
this is every day for future.

And it's not that simple.

Just skip a day of school.

Because there is a lot at stake.

Our planet, millions of jobs, social, strategic
and economic interest.

And the socioeconomic balance between
the poor and the rich.

Because there is no point that only the industrialist
countries ought to live in freedom, ought

to live in prosperity, and enjoy the wealth.

They have been curating at the account of
this planet.

So, there is a lot we need to do, and I do
believe that strong, mindful leadership is

being needed to meet this challenge.

And I really believe that this conference
right here at this day in this room will make

a serious attempt.

So, thank you Mr. Maas, thank you, Mr. Altmaier,
for making this method.

This is a global method and we need to solve
it in a way.

And this is the beginning.

And we need to keep this one alive.

It is a responsibility for the world, for
the people in this room, and for everyone

everyone on this planet who has the responsibility
and the power to do so.

The second reality which we are facing is
the soaring demand of energy.

Whether we like it or not, there is massive
demand of energy.

By 2040 the world's demands of electricity
will grow or will have grown by nearly 80%.

80 percent.

So, we are on the verge of electrification.

It's not behind us.

It's only the beginning.

And that's why this is so important that 1
billion of people today which do not have

power also get affordable, sustainable and,
of course, also reliable power.

This is important.

And this is as important
as the shelter and the place to live.

So, the big question, ladies and gentlemen,
the big question is, how do we meet that soaring

demand of energy and protect the climate?

How does that go together?

Because either one is a shortsighted way of
trying to anticipate the future.

Not too long ago U.N. Secretary General Antonio
Guterres gave the advice.

And this advice was, do not come with a speech.

Come with a plan.

Today, ladies and gentlemen, I come with both.

With a speech and a plan.

And we need to go and make it happen.

Our plan is what we call the energy value
charter.

It's a plan and Siemens blueprint for a successful
energy transition.

It's a capability that enables us to analyze
the energy system and propose tailormade solutions

for every country, for every economy, for
every company and for every consumer.

That's the topic.

Speak up.

Plan.

But also, don't forget to act.

And this is a viable plan.

And we have two priorities, actually three
priorities we want to give and to make a good

on and make that plan a reality.

The first one, secure reliable, affordable
and sustainable energy every day.

It's about finding the best possible mix for
every country, for every economy, for every

ecosystem which not every country is the same.

Not every ecosystem is the same.

We need to make tailormade things.

And one big example is an example I want to
show you because this is fascinating and massive

all together.

Five years ago, Egypt was that country you
did not want to ask for energy.

They inhibited massive energy disruption.

The industry was not able to be developed
because if you have no energy, there is no

industry.

And people did suffer from massive power outages.

But Egypt's leaders took that stance.

They said, we are going to have energy for
40 million people.

It's affordable, it's reliable and it's sustainable.

And within 28 months, 28 months.

Siemens and Egypt were able to build three
highly efficient combined cyclic gas power

plants, 14,400 megawatts.

The three biggest high efficiency power plants
built ever on this planet.

And it saved $1.4 billion US on money, and
it saves 680,000 tons of CO2 compared to what

they had before.

And that's massive.

And I really have to say, it is not massive
only for climate change.

It's also massive for economic development.

Because a hundred million people have the
right for a better future.

We brought more than 1,000 suppliers to the
big project.

Small to medium enterprises from Germany,
from Europe.

We built 61 local SMEs in Egypt to help us
build this.

As we speak today, we are training 6,000 young
people literally coming from the street with

the Germany apprenticeship program.

This is what the future is about.

Bringing socioeconomic interests together
and making it good for a better future.

Of course, every country is different.

Every country needs a tailormade solution.

Renewable energy, solar, wind, high efficient
gas.

Certainly, no coal.

Not sure about nuclear power.

The cleanest source of energy.

We cannot and we should not leave it up to
the next 200 generations of people to deal

with nuclear waste which nobody can control.

So, that also is something we need to do when
we look into the future.

We are currently working with Lebanon, Libya,
Pakistan, Afghanistan and many other countries

to provide tailormade solutions.

A combination of wind and solar, biomass,
hydro, but also a good load of high efficiency

gas fire power plants.

One big example we are currently working is
the roadmap developed for Iraq.

A country which has been suffering from violence
from war.

Millions of people not just live in poverty,
but also were in big concern about their lives.

They have a right to rebuild this great country.

I remember that still, you know, when I was
at school, the contributor, the milk and honey.

I'm glad we have the doctor, welcome to Berlin.

Thank you for being here.

We are going to make this work for a greater
good of people.

The second priority, ladies and gentlemen,
and so build efficient, safe and future infrastructure.

Power, whether it's renewable or not needs
to be transported in a meaningful way to the

people.

So, we need to go look what the infrastructure
looks like and how we can transport that to

the people in a meaningful way.

This is important.

Because this is part of the energy bill.

And if you look at China's one built road
initiative.

There are 90 countries that make up 70% of
the global population, and the infrastructure,

we have a responsibility go there and help
them to make this sustainable and affordable

and preferably green.

And renewable energy has got something else
except electrical power.

Renewable energy will, 
for the first time ever make green production

an economically feasible business plan.

Because the source of energy, be it solar
or be it wind doesn't cost anything.

So, we can do this.

And we will do this.

And this is important.

We can do 100 megawatt; we can do 1 gigawatt
or even more.

Number three, empower energy uses.

This is important.

Renewable energy will become a source for
the consumer.

In Germany alone in the
last five years have entered 1,000 energy

producers to 1.7 million people who produce
energy on their rooftop.

Or in the backyard.

Solar, wind, and everything else.

And that's also, ladies and gentlemen, where
digital technologies can help to enable the

uses to build their own energy mix at home
in their community and in their country.

So, that's why this is so important.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, the German Energiwende.

German Energiwende was and is a Lighthouse
project.

Not everything went always right.

The intent was greater than the execution
was in the end.

But it did it!

And it took a mass I have risk.

Because Germany's one of the most industrialist
countries in the world.

We cannot afford to have a power outage.

We cannot afford to take a risk on energy.

But we did.

And I am telling you, we did it, we learned
the hard way.

Now we know how it works.

And this is crucially important.

Germany overcame the German angst.

And finally, it went well.

And now we need to take it to the next level.

And the next level, ladies and gentlemen,
is the moonshot challenge of our generation

to meet the soaring demand of energy on the
one hand side but protect the climate on the

other hand side.

This coordinated approach.

Bring people out of poverty.

Save our planet is the single biggest challenge
of our time.

And we need to make it work and we can make
it work.

There is no reason why we cannot do it.

If we do it together, nobody said it was easy.

Nobody said it was easy.

But it's worth doing it because we have a
responsibility for 8 billion people.

Most of them need our help.

They need our leadership.

They need our plan.

But first and foremost, they need our action.

And in this room, the world will notice.

There's more than 50 leaders from the political
side.

Governments who are going to lead the future
for their countries.

There are scientists, there are people from
the media who can tell the world.

This room, these people here in this room
are committed to getting this done.

And if we do what we can do, the world will
notice.

Not only Fridays, but every single day.

With that, I do thank you very much.

Siemens is ready.

Are you?

Thank you very much.


