Good afternoon, my name is Marek Kaminski.

And I am from Poland.

I'm an explorer philosopher, social innovator.

With years of experience.

I had the Guiness record for reaching both
the north and south pole in one year in 1995

both without technical assistance.

And for reaching the South Pole on my own.

In 2005, I had the first ever expedition
to both poles with a young disabled person.

Among my numerous journeys I crossed the Gibson
desert in Australia on foot and went on the

geographic expedition to the south of the
Amazon and completed a 4,000 kilometre pilgrimage

From Russia to Santiago de Compostela in Spain.Through Berlin from Kaliningrad to Santiago de Compostela

And I walked through all of Berlin and all of German.

I have written 13 books and given lectures
around and the world and the founder of Kaminski

Institute and Foundation.

Last year I fully completed my 144-day expedition
project and traveled 30.000 kilometres through nine countries

from Poland to Japan and back in an electric
car leaving behind zero CO2 emissions.

This year I will be taking the concept to
a new level.

In October, I will undertake the artificial
expedition.

Ainte for short.

I will travel through 20 countries around
the world, starting in London, England, through

Europe, Turkey, Iran, India, China, south
Korea, Japan and the United States.

Once again, I will be going on this journey
in a zero-emission car.

But this time I will be not alone.

Meet my travel companion, NOA, the robot.

She will be joining me on the first expedition
featuring robot and a human circumnavigating

the world in an electric car.

NOA can speak and record replies.

Play projections from her head and move around
the stage with me during the presentation.

Everyone will be able to track our progress
via our website and social media channels.

To see the world through NOA's eyes.

She will be streaming entire journey online.

But why go around the world with a robot?

I'm an explorer.

So, it is now my purpose to cross the frontiers
of human limits.

I have done that with physical and mental
frontiers when I reached the North and the

South Pole.

I have attained my spiritual destination when
I arrived to Santiago de and I have pushed

the limits of how far we can travel in a passenger
vehicle without producing carbon emissions.

The time has come to set our eyes on a new
frontier.

The relationship between people and artificial
intelligence.

And the challenges we face together.

And I believe that there is no greater challenge
facing us today than humanmade climate change.

Scientific research shows that with tiny increases
in the global temperature levels, the consequences

will become more and more severe.

These consequences must remain manageable.

This is why we must make technology our partner
in developing sustainable solutions.

We need to abandon wasteful use of oil and
fossil fuels in favor of economical and intelligent

use of renewable energy.

Saying goodbye to an excessive resource consuming
lifestyle in a welldeveloped country and reducing

will lead to a better world.

And in turn, help us find the new models of
economical and social justice.

The energy seconder has long recognized the
power of artificial intelligence.

With existing technologies that go well beyond
smart systems that can turn the light on and

off.

Those technologies offer a wide spectrum of
approach to reducing the causes and effects

of climate change.

The benefits of artificial intelligence are
numerous.

It can repeatedly and accurately perform tedious
tasks and it is not motivated by greed or

selfinterest.

But adapting new technologies can be a long,
slow process.

Often accompanied by reluctance and skepticism.

By going around the world in an electric car
together with NOA as my codriver, I hope to

overcome yes, this is my route.

Entire route.

I hope to overcome my own reservations toward
new technologies by building my relationship

with NOA based on trust and codependence.

We will share the high and low points of our
journey and lead my example how people and

technology can work, innovate and succeed
together.

Our mission can be summed up in three points.

Singularity.

If humanity used technologies for the intended
purpose, we could create a fair society on

all levels.

In this sense, artificial intelligence does
not exist to create super humans.

But to make humans more super.

Sustainability.

We want to raise awareness of the urgent need
to keep our carbon footprint to a minimum.

Social empowerment.

Technology and education result in increased
socioempowerment, autonomy and selfdetermination.

This means people can better represent their
interests and make informed decisions.

During our four-month adventure, NOA will
be collecting data for her global change report.

Our car will be fitted with pollution detectors.

One of each.

This is the pollution detector from Poland.

One of them I will leave here in this place
in Berlin.

Along the way, we will be visiting places
where technology is positively used to reduce

and reverse the effect of the climate change.

We will be also meeting with many people to
tell them about our mission and to listen

to what they have to say about artificial
intelligence technology in the fights against

the climate change.

We hope for 2019 to create new mindset by
connecting people with technology and raising

awareness of what can be achieved with the
help of artificial intelligence.

So, please keep your fingers crossed.

As this robot and this human join forces to
create a better world.

Thank you.

Thanks for joining us today.

And then on the road.

And, of course, we are open to partners around
the world.

You can get in contact with me today and any
time you like through and through any channels

you want.

We are at the end of the great event.

And you will see me next year with a heavy
load of results.

See you at BETD 2020.

Goodbye.


