Excellency, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
Guten morgen, it's a pleasure to be back in

Berlin for this energy transition dialogue.

It might surprise you to hear my key message
at this dialogue is, the time for talking

is over. It's time for action.

We're facing a climate crisis that poses an
existential threat to all humanity.

The evidence about the effects of climate
change is incontrovertible, and the moral

case is indisputable.

We have been talking for decades, the Elders
were brought together by Nelson Mandela in

2007, and I'm now the chair following the
sad death of Kofi Annan, view climate change

with nuclear weapons as the twin existential
threats of our age. But we need to be blunt

Words are not enough.

What we need is action.

Action to drastically cut emissions so temperatures
don't rise above the 1.5-degree limit.

Action to end the use of fossil fuels in domestic
markets and the financing of fossil fuel projects

in developing countries by development banks
and other financial institutions.

And action to deliver a just transition so
that regions and communities previously reliant

on fossil fuel production for jobs and broader
economic and social structures are not abandoned.

That workers rights and dignity are respected
and that new opportunities are provided through

investment and education for current and future
generations.

I'm conscious, of course, that the word "Transition"
has a special resonance here in Berlin in

2019.

30 years ago, this city and this whole country
was on the brink of momentous change that

became known as die Wende, as mass popular protests in the GDR forced

what would have been unthinkable for decades: the fall of the Berlin Wall, the collapse of the communist

regime and ultimately the reunification of
east and west Germany.

Germans can be proud of the thriving democratic
culture and the leadership that the country

has played on international climate policy
and in welcoming hundreds of thousands of

refugees and migrants in recent years.

But it must also be acknowledged at fruits
of this transition weren't always evenly distributed.

Leading in some cases to bitterness and alienation.

In too many cases, shortterm financial calculations
drove investment policy.

While former industrial workers and state
employees were left with few viable employment

options in their home cities and regions.

So, we must meet the imperative to deliver
an energy transition that leads to a zero

carbon, climate resilient economy.

And we must learn from both the successes
and the challenges of Germany's recent past

to make sure the model we choose is sustainable,
just, inclusive and robust.

In order to do this, we need to radically
shift our assumptions and expectations about

what drives economic and development policy.

Where the political consensus should lie.

And what responsibilities political and business
leaders owe to their respective constituencies.

A week ago, I led a group of Elders to China.

Where we discussed the reality that some countries
have been reneging or faltering on their Paris

climate commitments.

In that context, we, the Elders, urged China
to consider showing more leadership and ambition.

Even though China is still in some ways a
developing country.

So, how much more do the Elders expect from
a leading European country?

Yes.

To quote the great postwar German politician,
Billy Brandt, the future will not be shaped

by those stuck in the past.

That's from 1971, nearly half a century ago.

But his words ring true today at a time when
our world and our climate are changing with

disorientating speed.

We need, I believe, a climate justice movement.

Speaking up for people who have the least
capacity to protect themselves, their families,

their homes and their incomes from the impacts
of climate change.

And, indeed, climate action, policies which
aren't grounded in human rights.

Just think of the terrible devastation caused
by cyclone Ide in recent weeks in Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Malawi.

I came from Abidjan, where I was taking part in the Mo Ibrahim forum, an annual forum on African leadership

we were talking a lot about migration, jobs and youth. But we were talking a lot about this devestating cyclone

About the intense droughts still in East Africa.

About the problems that African countries are
suffering from.

And I was particularly struck by a elder there,
Graca Machel, she's from Mozambique and had

seen the devastation, she said, you know,
Mary I didn't see the connection between climate

and human rights and the justice until I saw
that devastation.

It is not acceptable that this is happening,
and it is caused by human activities continuing

with fossil fuels.

You know, a very deeply felt message from
my fellow Elder.

And in this case climate change is not only
a destructive force in its own right, it also

serves to amplify and aggravate existing inequalities
as those with the least resources suffer the

greatest hardships.

Climate change respects no borders and it
affects all countries, regardless of income

level.

As witnessed by the devastating floods here
in Germany in recent years or the cyclones

and hurricanes that have battered the coasts
of the United States.

At its heart, climate justice is a transformative
concept.

It insists on a shift from a discourse on
greenhouse gases and melting icecaps into

what in effect is a civil rights movement
with people and communities most vulnerable

to climate impacts at its heart.

Now, thanks to the recent marches, strikes
and protests of hundreds of thousands of school

children, including I know here in Berlin,
we have begun to understand the intergenerational

injustice of climate change.

And the need to plan transition policy over
a time span to include many generations to

follow.

Including those yet unborn.

The report last October of the intergovernmental
panel on climate change on the steps needed

to meet the target of keeping warming to 1.5
degrees should and must herald the planned

end of the past era.

We've entered a new reality.

Where fossil fuel companies have lost their
legitimacy and social license to operate.

But it must be a planned transition.

If governments are to retain their own legitimacy
and trust among citizens with this be means

they must end all fossil fuel subsidies in
all forms.

So, coal and other hydrocarbons are kept in
the ground and resources are invested instead

in clean, renewable energy and green technologies.

And these are hardly outrageous demands for
a country like Germany.

It's merely a reminder to the government here
to give up to its own commitment as a G20

member.

To end all fossil fuel subsidies a decade
after the promise of the first made.

As you would know better than me, there are
some 83 billion tons of hard coal still in

the ground in Germany.

Of these, 36 million tons are considered mineable.

But they're extremely deep and complicated
location makes mining too costly to compete

on the world market.

It therefore doesn't make economic sense to
extract them.

It's a waste in fossil fuel resources.

An exercise has been undertaken in this country
as part of the coal exit commission.

And that an agreement has been reached to
end coalfired power generation by 2038.

This report acknowledges that ending coalfired
power production around the globe is indispensable

for effective climate action.

And this needs to be retained as the key message
by all stakeholders from government and industry

to NGOs, civil society, labor unions and policy
experts.

Germany has shown the world that high levels
of renewable energy are affordable, reliable

and manageable.

The next step is a just transition out of
coal for good which can show other countries

that such a process is economically, socially
and politically viable.

Analysis by the international energy agency,
and here I understand you heard at the highest

level from the IEA this morning, and climate
analytics shows that OACD countries need to

be off coal by 2030.

Germany, as the world's fifth biggest user
of coal and the biggest user of lignite has

a special responsibility to act.

So, the recommendations of the coal exit commission
are a welcome first step.

But I do urge you all to show greater ambition
and urgency infused with a spirit of solidarity.

This is no time for incremental steps.

We need radical action that sends a signal
to investors, energy companies and other governments

that business as usual is not an option.

Financial support to help a just transition
for the affected communities and coal regions

is only fair.

But it would be a poor signal and a questionable
use you have public funds if Germany spends

billions in compensation to power utilities
which were spent too long resisting action

on climate change instead of to the people
and communities affected.

I've seen in my own work with the B team of
business leaders which has a close link to

the Elders, and they have committed their
companies to have net zero greenhouse gas

emissions by 2050.

And to do it the climate justice way, I've
seen that the private sector can be a positive

force in helping achieve climate justice with
just transition.

But business leaders must also speak up for
our regulatory environment that protects all

human rights.

One that holds them accountable for their
actions as well.

They must also do more to be transparent and
accountable about their own activities, including

their roles in partnerships to implement the
sustainable development goals.

Germany and other developed countries need
to accelerate their plan farce postcoal, carbonneutral

future.

But they cannot simply insist that poorer
countries refrain from using files on account

of climate change.

Instead, they must provide feasible alternatives.

In the spirit of global solidarity and selfinterest,
all countries need to work together to enable

an inclusive transition.

One which prioritizes the needs of those furthest
behind and ensures all people benefit from

the technologies developed to pioneer sustainable
development pathways.

Indeed, developed countries should learn from
the initiatives like the climate vulnerable

forum which I've worked closely with where
small island states and other poor countries

acutely at risk from rising temperatures and
sea levels have shown that bold and inclusive

leadership is possible.

I attended a ministerial before the meeting
in Bonn shared by Fiji, a couple of years ago.

And it was held in Addis under the chairmanship
of Ethiopia.

And I was so impressed by the ambition of
those Presidents and prime ministers and ministers

of small island states and least developed
countries to have that radical transformation.

But they need the investment and the transfer
of technology.

And just as important, development banks and
export financial initiatives from developed

countries must immediately halt investment
in fossil fuel projects abroad.

Otherwise developing countries will understandingly
look at hypocrisy, and those countries exporting

their carbon emissions and leaving those with
the fewer resources to count the cost in economic

and environmental terms.

In the context of talking about migration,
jobs and youth, there was a lot of talk about

the need for more support for African countries
to move more rapidly into clean energy.

Both large projects, but also offgrid energy.

And I don't know why we can't have a moonshot
approach to getting to the approximately 1

billion people who never switched switch for
electricity and 2.3 billion who still

cook on dirty cook stoves.

When we have the gadgets, we have all the
possibilities, why don't we make that a real

moonshot goal for our world in order to show
the better world that we can achieve.

Sometimes it may be a useful advocacy tool
to present these choices as a matter of sound

investment or shrewd selfinterest, but fundamentally
it's a matter of human rights and of justice.

Earlier I quoted Willy Brandt, but I'm reminded
of another remark from a century ago by someone on the more radical

end of the German political spectrum, Rosa
Luxemburg she said that freedom is always freedom for the

one who thinks differently.

Her words are an inspiration and a challenge.

Freedom means diversity.

A relentless questioning, a refusal to accept
orthodoxies and dogmas from any movement.

But it's responsibility for all citizens to
engage in the public sphere and democratic process.

Not withdraw into apathy or virtual echo chambers
of the like-minded.

This is engaging with the fossil fuel companies
and financial institutions.

And building a constructive dialogue while
never compromising on the principle and urgency

of action.

It means listening to the form of coal and
steelworkers and their families in regions

across Germany.

Understanding their own perceptions and ensuring  that economic and social transitions

are peoplecentered, inclusive and designed with social justice in mind.

The existential threats confronts us with our shared interdependence.

I believe as a granny, I am lucky enough to have six grandchildren, the eldest is 15.

So I have been listening with increasing awareness of our role as global citizens to the school children.

They will come out en masse on the 12th of
April.

Let's see here in Germany, in Australia, in
the United States, in various parts of the world.

They are saying to us; you are not protecting
us.

You are not protecting our future.

What could be more important?

So, I do look forward to stimulating discussions.

And I wanted to end with the importance of
culture in this debate by just simply lifting

this up and hoping that a number of you recognize
the little sun of my friend Olafur Eliasson.

Olafur has his wonderful studio here in Berlin.

I have been there a number of times.

He brought this little sun to Paris to encourage
solar energy offgrid for developing countries.

And he's as passionate about the climate issue
as I.

And we've talked about how to imagine the
world we will have, a healthier world, with

no air pollution, when we have moved.

And hopefully everybody will have the energy
to make sure their families can be safe and

prosper and that children can be educated
at school.

And so, there are three things that we all
need to do.

One is, everybody needs to take climate
change personally in their lives

Every one of us.

I've become a pescatarian.

I don't eat fish I don't eat meat, sorry. And you know it's a small thing, but

I liked lamb, but no more.

I've done something.

When you have done something yourself that
you wouldn't have done because you care about

the issue, get cross and angry with those
not doing enough.

That means government at different levels,
business, especially fossil fuel, transportation,

everything.

Use your voice and vote.

Go out and march.

Do what the school children are doing.

Make your voice heard.

And the third thing, and this is the sun,
imagine this world that we need to be hurrying

towards so we will be energized to hurry towards
it as quickly as possible.

Thank you very much for your attention.

Thank you.


