Good morning, ministers, distinguished colleagues
from all over the world, excellencies, ambassadors,

MPs, Presidents, ladies and gentlemen.

A special welcome to everyone who supports
climate protection and the energy transition.

Standing here in the front gives me the opportunity
to see a really impressive picture.

There are even more participants than last
year.

There are more ministers than last year.

And this serves as proof that the energy transition
is making headway.

And this is necessary.

It is absolutely necessary because what our
world needs is shared projects.

Shared projects that are easily to define.

Freedom and peace for everyone in the world.

The right of the possibility to aspire to
prosperity everywhere in the world.

And all this is only going to work out if
we hand over to our children and grandchildren

a planet that has an intact climate that is
operating on renewables and that uses its

natural resources in a protective way.

This means deploying new technologies and
it means engaging in cooperation.

We are seeing very interesting developments.

On the one hand, we're seeing that we've made
great headway when it comes to deploying renewables

in China and in Vietnam, in Turkey and Morocco,
in the United Arab Emirates and in many other

countries in the world including Europe and
in particular, Germany.

So, these are all countries where we're seeing
renewables being deployed at a large speed.

And the good news is, many of these countries
are now able to offer renewable energy at

competitive prices.

If we want to achieve a situation whereby
our citizens and our world can rely on clean

energy at a reliable price, we need to actually
focus on competition, on the business case.

And we also need to realize that the transition
from the age of fossil fuels to the age of

renewables is a transition with intermediate
steps.

So, that means old power plants with high
emissions need to be switched off and replaced

with modern gas fire power plants that cut
emissions by half.

This marks an important step towards an energy
system that one day will be 100% renewable.

And we will only be able to walk this way
successfully if we support each other.

Germany has concluded energy partnerships
with a large number of countries.

You also have economic partnerships with a
large number of countries.

And I will make use of this conference to
have bilateral talks with many of my colleagues

and to extend our cooperation.

We know that this is not only about cooperation
between ministers from various countries.

It is cooperation between governments, between
industry and society.

Because all over the globe there are companies
that specialize in this type of technology,

that offer this type of technology and that
are able to actually modernize the energy

supply of entire countries to make them more
efficient and greener.

And for this reason, we have a shared responsibility.

Because in our world there are trade conflicts
emerging.

Many countries are having disputes with other
countries about tariffs and about whether

or not to pull up the economic drawbridge
and isolate one's market.

They're trying to gain a small advantage and
they neglect to see that this will harm the

overall global economy.

Christine Lagarde disciplined to us over the
last few months we have seen the global economy

cool down.

She called a synchronized slowdown.

And this is not inevitable.

We can do something to address this and we
can achieve this if we work together and if

we really invest more in our energy supply.

Energy powers economic growth.

Economic growth and the energy supply must
go hand in hand, and they must be sustainable

in the longterm.

And this is why we need this approach.

Over the past few years we've talked a lot.

We talked about modern power plants, about
wind farms, about potable tanks.

And we continue to do so.

It continues to be important.

And there are so many countries that are only
just beginning to really look into these technologies

and the opportunities they offer.

But we also need to take the next step.

We need to work together with the IEA and
also with IRENA which has its second seat

in Bonn.

And, of course, we will support
them and their new President so that they

can do their job.

We need systems integration.

We need to make sure that renewables will
also be deployed in transport, in building

energy and agriculture and in all these sectors.

In many countries, we are also thinking about
hydrogen strategies.

Many countries are thinking about this.

None of this is a secret anymore.

But at the same time, we also need to really
bring together these activities into a joint

hydrogen strategy and we need to work on this.

Electronic mobility will be part of our strategy.

We will have alternative drive lines and Kenya
and other countries have already made major

headway here.

Europe has made major progress on the deployment
of renewable energies.

And we also to want play an important role
in the mobility transition.

And this is why we are investing in modern
battery cells.

This is why we're investing in alternative
drive line technology.

This is why we're investing in synthetic climateneutral
fuels.

In Germany, we decided to phase out our current
lignite production and replacing these old

power plants are renewables.

And we're demonstrating that a highly industrialized
country like Germany is able, within just

a few decades, to almost completely rearrange
its energy system without harming its competitiveness.

Without destroying jobs.

We're proud that Germany has 45 million people
in work, in paid work.

And this is the largest number in our history.

Despite the fact that we are at the forefront
of renewable energies, of resource efficiency

and sustainability.

We know how many activities you are undertaking
in your countries.

And we know that in the role of a foreign
minister or an energy minister, it can be

very hard with discussions with ministers
of finance and with heads of government.

But at the same time, we also know that it's
getting easier for the energy transition or

to advocate the energy transition because
there are many positive examples, not just Germany

There are others across the world.

And this is something that really needs to
motivate us.

So, let us make a commitment to multilateralism.

And let us make a commitment to bilateral
and multilateral cooperation and to solidarity.

Let us share our experiences with the energy
transition.

The energy transition in other countries,
in other continents, all this really has a

positive impact on all of us because it makes
the entire planet more sustainable, safer

and more stable.

We are convinced that it will help with stability
when all of your citizens have equal access

to energy, to water, to heat and to mobility.

So, we are convinced that we must not destroy
the aspirations and dreams of our citizens.

The dreams of living a happy life in prosperity
and in an intact environment.

This is what young people are working towards
in Bangladesh, in Indonesia, in the Philippines,

in Egypt, in Saudi Arabia, and in Europe and
everywhere in the world.

So, this is our challenge.

So, let us work towards this challenge.

I wish you positive and fruitful discussions,
good deals and I wish us all that we will

see more progress in the energy
transition next year that will see that there

is visible progress and measurable progress
on the deployment of renewable energy so that

we can show that economic growth and climate
protection can go hand in hand.

So, I wish you all the best for this conference
in Berlin.


