So before starting I wish to address my gratitude you to the German government and also
to the sponsors of this event.

The dialogue is very important, it's critical.

And to involving the bottom of the pyramid
that I'm representing here.

And together we're going to win that race
of lasting development for a winwin green growth.

It's possible.

It's a pleasure for me to be here this morning.

And I congratulate you as well to be here
in the room.

My work, I started with my own environment.

Because I find out that without energy, there
is no growth.

And you even cannot make your homework.

I faced that myself because I went barefoot
to school.

And learned to make my homework with a kerosene
lamp.

And then all those things talk to me, my lungs
are weak because of that.

But nevertheless, I'm not complaining.

I'm not here to complain.

We're here for business.

And from that challenge I turned it into opportunity.

Myself, I'm an electromechanical engineer
and I design my own solar lantern that has a start.

Has a starting point.

And I find out that the climate is tough.

Then the cable doesn't resist.

What I have done is to work on it for two
years and set a standard which is quality.

Because what the products that exist at the
moment can stand.

High cold, but not high heat.

So, it's important as well it has a frequency
to come up with our own standards and to bring

it on the table to set it.

Africa has assets.

Our youth.

That's not the problem.

It's our big assets.

Because they're our children.

That's how we grow, the economy grows.

When we talk about GDP, how do we measure
it?

It's about the number of the people that you
have in the country.

Those are the forces, the drivers of the economy.

Our informal sector, be aware that they're
informal by default.

Because the infrastructure is not there.

But nevertheless, they're contributing up
to 90% of the GDP of the country.

But when this comes to development and funds
for business, they're not taking an account.

So, then they create the global expertise
for the informal sector where I bring a toolkit

to support them.

To manage on a daily basis their businesses.

Because we don't want to complain, but to
bring solutions.

And now we are in the era of digitalization.

So, to go into the value chain of the production
and also bring them and the shared value of

global markets, we needed to define how the
benefits are shared.

And I took the value chain of the share.

And I created the Yam toolkit.

It means smart in my mother tongue.

And I found out that our women were working
for less than a cent per hour.

And when you know the hard work that you need
to do to have a kilo of shared butter, you

can imagine.

Then I bring those evidence sciencebased to
the big players.

Which it's Unilever, Paul Pullman, who got
to really appreciate that.

And many of you know that is really also one
of the industries that's championing for sustainable

development goals.

Because it's our duty, part of my duty, to
assess real data and bring it to the decisioners.

If you don't take it into account, you can
come, and I have to say that I didn't do part

of my homework. I did it.

Data also is an asset.

We are aware, as Africans, that data is our
asset.

What are we going to do with the assets that
are collected now?

We use that to measure, to create economic
growth, to be able to trade.

Because it's about trade.

We want to trade, collect taxes, build our
roads, invest in research and development.

And many of you know that in Africa we have
a lot of creatives.

Young people who are creating a lot of apps.

And most of the ones who are known is a frequent
creation, the mobile banking.

It's our solution.

But many Africans don't know that is an African
solution.

But the telecompanies, they do know and
they're making a lot of profit in Africa.

At the moment the mobile banking
sector is making a lot of benefit.

Nothing wrong.

Profit is not a dirty word.

And I'm the first saying that.

The issue is, how are we sharing that benefit?

We can grow green, make profit.

And that brings me to the carbon pricing where
it will be following the keynote speaking.

At the Africa Climate Week in Accra, I have
been one of the three rapporteurs for our

continent.

And we just blushed the Africa carbon credit
tax leadership coalition.

Because we know that carbon credit and combined
with data is an underlying asset and guarantee

that we can make available to guarantee our
own economy.

Because maybe now the carbon pricing is something
around 20 a ton.

But we don't want to give away our total asset
of carbon credits because maybe in 50 years

1 ton will be maybe 1,000 or 20,000.

But we can take part of that carbon credit
to help our economy growth.

So, I won't take much more.

Moderator, my sister.

She's doing also a great job, Dr.Davis.

You know, I just want to come up here with
me, my sister.

You know often we had to put our I will
bring it in French.

[Speaking in French] how often that when
frequently we show professionalism, we act

arrogant.

We're not arrogant.

We just want to work together with you.

She's a doctor, she's a scientist.

What we want is just to work with you.

This is the new face of Africa.

We left she left the US, I left the EU,
to go in the grassroots.

Work with my brothers and sisters.

Because my mother, she didn't know how to
write and read.

But she was clever in saying you need to go
to school.

And learn other languages to be able to communicate.

Communication is important.

The media, I invite you to show the other
face of Africa.

This is very important.

That is how we will bring together.

And I will end with our African product everybody
knows.

If you want to go fast, go alone.

If you want to go further, we'll go together.

I invite you to come in our West Africa solar
pack projects, hosted by the center for renewable energy.

And energy, as you can see, this is about
a trillions of business.

And you are most welcome to do business and
to share.

It's about growing the pie.

I thank you so much.

Vielen Dank.


