The same happens to me too because some names
are difficult for me to pronounce as well.

I'll try it again, Princess Djigma, Linda Davis.

My colleague, ladies and gentlemen.

Well, the urgency to act.

I think there's no question about it, but
I would like to briefly exemplify it again.

Worldwide we have extreme weather events.

Maybe you remember the images of Cyclone Idai.

The pictures from Mozambique.

We remember the cold spell in the US and Canada.

You remember pictures of forest fires in California
and the droughts in east and west Africa.

And even Germany was not spared.

We had a rather dry summer last year.

And therefore, we had crop failures if had
agriculture.

So, that shows how important it is, this issue.

The world metrological organization said for
many years in a row this is the hottest year on record.

2015 to 2018.

And never before has the sea level risen as
much as last year.

It rose by 3.7 millimeters.

It doesn't sound like much.

But it shows that the situation is exacerbating
and is speeding up.

And I just don't just want to refer to the
urgency, but I also want to say that even

if temperature levels rise by only 1 degree
Celsius, we already sea change that causes

disasters and natural disasters and has
an effect on agriculture, et cetera.

It's a human tragedy as well.

Not just a material one.

So, we need to act now.

I think that means also that no matter where
we are, we are responsible for an economic,

ecological and societal development, social
development.

And that means that we need to lower our greenhouse
gas emissions so that we can limit the effects

of climate change.

What can we do to limit the temperature increase?

So, well, it's about climate change mitigation.

We need to have a global energy transition.

And that means that we need to expand renewable
energies.

And at the same time, we need to increase
our energy efficiency.

Twothirds of all greenhouse gas emissions
are generated by energy generation or by energy use.

And onethird alone is created through energy
generation by fossil energy.

I held many talks recently, in recent months
and weeks.

And it became clear that we need to sort of
limit global warming to 2% or preferably 1.5%

and that we're probably not going to achieve
that.

And among experts, it's therefore important
to talk about it again to reiterate that if

we continue as before, we will have to expect an increase of 3 degrees

Celsius with all the consequences that we'll
have.

So, a few years ago, we thought, well, we
can probably emit fewer greenhouse gases,

but last year the greenhouse gases, gas emissions
rose to 33 gigatons mainly as a result of

increased use of oil, gas and coal.

The increase of coalfired power generation
is a reason for that.

Global power generation with coal.

In China and India, people are reducing their
plans to expand coalfire power generation,

but other countries are planning new plans
in this area.

For example, Indonesia, Vietnam and Turkey,
but also in Japan.

So, we need to think more about coalfired
power generation.

And I think it's a good sign that my minister
who is at the climate cabinet at the moment,

that she is thinking about this and we're
thinking about joining the powering pass coal alliance.

Those are things that we now need to implement
and to get to business, to get to that business

that the previous speaker mentioned.

We need to triple the investments in energy
efficiency, and we need to double investments

in the expansion of renewables.

What are we doing in Germany?

Of course, well, in theory you can philosophize
about what we have to do.

And I think the majority is of the same opinion.

But at the same time, we need to act.

In this coalition, we established a commission.

It's called growth, structural change and
employment.

Well, it's known as the COAL Commission.

And business, industry, environmental associations,
trade unions, regions, and academia are represented

in this commission.

And it was a historical step that this commission
managed to submit unanimous recommendation to us.

Telling us to stop coalfired power generation
and to develop structures further in the region.

That means that the power plant capacities
must be decommissioned until 2022 by 25%.

And by 60% until 2030 with
baseline 2017.

So, at the moment, still, a quarter of our
greenhouse gas emissions still come from coal

power plants.

And the 4.5 reduction is also due to the decommissioning.

But we have to work with the regions.

There needs to be... it's a difficult transition
because it needs to be equitable. It needs to be fair.

And I think we can lead as an example here.

And I think we would be welladvised to connect
ourselves with others and to have a global

network of likeminded countries.

Let me get to climate change mitigation and
our action program for 2030.

We need to achieve the sustainable development
goals by 2030.

We have committed to that.

And we also have a European reduction target
and we are enshrining that in national legislation.

The 2015 agreement, together with the sustainable
development goals and others was the starting

point for a global sustainable development.

And I think it shows social, ecological and
economic.

That's what this progress must be.

Many people and many countries have put all
their hopes in that.

And I think that's important.

Especially for stabilization in the individual
countries.

We must not disappoint this trust.

In Europe we have emission trading scheme,
carbon pricing and I think the reform showed

that we can strengthen this trading.

The price of the certificate has tripled.

And I'm convinced that by reforming emission
trading in Europe, we have actually strengthened

the scheme and put sustainable longterm incentives
for sustainable developments, sustainable

industries.

The shortage prices at the beginning of the
next trading period are expected and they

are incentivizing emission reductions.

Of course, we also need to look at other areas
like the heat area, heat market, et cetera,

and use renewable energies there.

One key topic that is also one key topic
here at this dialogue.

My minister Svenja Schulze brought carbon
pricing on the table.

And she has developed a concept and there
are two criteria for success.

One is that carbon pricing must put effective
incentives and the distributional effects

also need to be considered.

And need to be shaped in a smart way.

So, it's not about forcing CO2 reduction or
generating additional income for state coffers.

But we need  an incentive
that is socially just.

Exactly how we do that, how we redistribute
the revenues of carbon pricing, that's something

that's being discussed with many different
options available.

And my ministry is working on a concept on
how such a carbon pricing concept can be climate

effective and socially just at the same time.

So, we need to bring these two aspects together
in order to ensure acceptance in society.

And we need to have the support from society.

Especially young people don't want to wait
any longer.

Young people want us to act now.

A couple of words about the European climate
policy.

This year we will think about the longterm
strategy beyond 2030.

With its vision and comprehensive analysis
for climate neutral economy, the European

commission showed that a transition to greenhouse
gas neutrality is not only technically feasible,

but also an economic advantage to do that
until 2050.

And in the last few years, the whole climate
and energy legislation has been reformed until 2030.

We will now have a comprehensive legal framework
that will regulate how many greenhouse gas

emissions there may be per year.

Or may be emitted per year.

The climate regulation allocates these emission
reduction targets to the individual EU member

states on the basis of per capita GDP.

And I hope that by the end of the year all
member states will be

ready so that we can finalize national energy
and climate plans.

The binding requirements at EU level correspond
mostly to our national targets.

In 2020, we will not hit our target in Germany
in terms of ETS as well.

That means that we need to buy additional
certificates.

But what I want to say is that you invest
beforehand in renewable energies with in sustainable energy.

I think that makes more economic sense than
paying for certificates later on.

Especially Germany with its innovative power
has a special responsibility for decarbonization

of the energy system.

And we are not just looking at the expansion
of renewable energies, but also by increasing efficiencies.

But having better solutions for more flexibility,
optimized networks and power to access technology,

storage technologies as well.

I think we need to have more speed in order to achieve all our targets

And, yeah.

Make more progress here.

Of course, there are also areas where it's
going to be a little bit more difficult.

I'm thinking about special industrial areas
where we also want to provide support.

And that's why we have also established a
program to support industry.

It's important that renewable energy, transport,
industry, that we look at the different sectors

and see how we can link them up with each
other and how we can advance sector coupling.

In order for all of this to be successful,
and let me come back to what happens if we're

not successful, what effects will that have?

It will not only impact on the sea level and
extreme weather events, it has something to

do with peace.

With justice.

And that's what young people are asking for.

The Fridays for future movement comes at the
right time to show us adults, to act, to be

courageous, to move ahead.

And I think we need to pick up on that.

The role of industrialized countries
is pretty clear.

And I'm sure that with dialogues such as this,
with the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue,

we can make progress and I'm very happy that
you are all committed and dedicated to achieving

the climate goals 2030 and 2050.

Working together and making sure that the
world be a better place.

Thank you.


