Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much
for those having the time until the end of

that what amazing two days, aren't they?

What an amazing two days I have to say.

That is due to first of all Linda Davis.

Thank you so much for the very great moderation.

And it is, of course, thanks to all of the
staff of our foreign office of our ministry,

of course.

And all those in the consortium which have
made this event possible.

If we speak over the days, if we meet around
this hall.

If we meet in the evening, we don't see how
much effort is behind such an event.

So, really thank you so much.

And you can be assured that this work will
be on your shoulders also for the next year.

And I think what is very important we have
had this year ever more ministers and vice ministers.

45 out of a hundred countries.

So, but that also means there are some 55
missing for those countries which haven't

sent their ministers.

We have had ever more CEOs.

We have had, as we heard, ever more women.

Which is just great.

Amongst the CEOs and amongst the panelists.

And I think we have had ever more startups
in the whole process.

And thanks to the German energy agency at
that point time because these startup, together

with Fridays for Future, our future.

Because that is the brain developing our future
of tomorrow.

And therefore, I'm really proud.

We are really proud that these startups could
manage to come here to present themselves

and that we were able to select the winners
which presented their ideas on the panels.

I think that it's a very, very important point.

It's a very important part of the overall
Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue that we

include the startups in the whole setup.

So, the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue
has I would say become the leading energy

event worldwide.

And you can be sure that we, the German government,
is really proud to host it.

We are really proud to host it.

Why?

Very simple.

Because it is some sort of gathering together
with the panels exchanges views.

But on the other hand, everybody knows that
everybody else is there.

And I think that's the very, very important
point that we have a nucleus of where we can

discuss the future of energy.

Where we can discuss the future of climate.

Where we can ask ourselves, are we going to
take action?

Or are we only going to discuss?

And when I met various colleagues around the
world from the business sector, from the political

sector, I have really had the impression that
a lot of activity is going on.

And a lot of people are very much encouraged
of taking action if they haven't done so far.

So, I think that is the very important part
of the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.

And for us it's important to know what have
we learned?

It's that sort of political implication.

And we have learned hundreds and thousands
of things, I think, in the last two days.

But I will pick out perhaps some eight aspects
of what we have learned.

First of all, it's nothing new.

But again, we've learned that it's really
fascinating to exchange experience.

Not to reinvent the wheel twice, three times,
four times, seven times.

But to take the experience from other countries,
take the experience from other companies,

and to ask yourself, is this possible also
to be adapted by myself?

Or how do I have to change that?

I think that is extremely important because
very often, and if I'm talking about German

politics, we are only looking in this little
tiny country.

Now, we are facing so many little tiny problems
in Germany.

And for us this two days is the perfect opportunity
to open our minds.

And to ask ourselves, is all that's problematic
really that important thing if we are talking

about a global energy transition and the global
action for climate change?

Second point is that we've learned that only
a holistic view or call it only holistic approach

on the energy transition will work.

We will have no chance if we select certain
sectors, if we select certain infrastructure,

if we select certain customers, if we select
certain producers or certain applications.

We can only win the game if we view all of
those in a very holistic view, combine them

together, all the infrastructures, days and
electric and heat infrastructure, all together.

Not separating them.

And then we know, and we are pretty clear
that the world will not be allelectric.

But it will be much more electric.

But that doesn't mean that we have to find
solutions for those parts which will not be

electric.

Because infrastructures provided for that
will not help.

Compared to if we use it in a format with
the energy or whatever.

So, the holistic view I think that was for
me very important during those two days is

key.

What else have we learned?

The third point is it's time if we have not
acted so far to act now.

I think it was said very clearly not only
Fridays for Future.

It's about the question, are we really serious
that we take action?

Or are we just debating?

We have had today our first climate cabinet
in Germany.

So, we formed a cabinet because we have a
still have a sense in Germany on how to tackle

the climate agenda and the climate law.

So, today there was the first climate cabinet
and that is going forward because we need

to act.

And I think every country has to do so.

Fourth point what we've learned.

Again, and again, but I'm never tried to say
so.

We can only win if we view what we
call what I call loving twins together.

And that is renewable energy and energy efficiency.

And I very often hear that both are fighting
each other because they say, if we need more

energy, then we can deploy more renewables.

For Germany, a very simple figure is that
we have an energy demand which is at about

2500terabyte hours.

Out of those we produce with wind and PV about
260.

If we're not going to produce the 2500 and
increase the 160, we will never come to the

solution which is decarbonization of our energy
demand.

That was the lesson learned, to be loving
twins.

Fifth point.

What we've learned.

Price tanks for CO2.

Yes.

What I understand is the only question there
which was answered to 100% by yes was do we

need a price for CO2?

And, of course, it's quite clear if we want
to avoid something and that something doesn't

have any price at all, how should we drive
worldwide economies to avoid that something

which costs nothing?

There are different ways on doing that.

We have the European system.

We are lagging behind in Germany in the nonETS
sector.

But it's quite clear that if we don't agree
on pricing CO2, we will never, ever succeed

to the target we all agreed in Paris.

And that comes along with a sixth point which
is the financial sector.

I little bit disagree what you've said before
because you have the opinion that the financial

sector is already acting.

The financial sector is very much looking
on risk mitigation.

And specifically, if you look to the big funds.

And that was also discussed during the two
days.

The big funds worldwide.

They are not keen to invest in CO2 high and
CO2 risky innovations.

They are very keen in investing on CO2low
investments.

Because they see a risk associated with CO2.

And that they call it risk mitigation.

That is all for the big funds.

And, of course, if we would agree and come
it a CO2 price, then, of course, the financial

sector will even be much more advanced in
taking the approach towards CO2 low or free

investments.

What else have we learned?

What we have learned is that digitalization
is certainly the key to almost everything

of a business model in the future.

It's not only Marek's NOA.

It is the huge bunch of information which
can flow from everywhere to elsewhere.

And those business models associated with
that and the possibility of making everybody,

not those sitting here in the room, but everybody
in the world producers or consumers, that

is something which really changes this whole
game completely.

And I think we have not yet understood, as
legislators, where do we have to keep our

fingers off?

And where do we have to set regulation which
allows the digital new business models to

appear in reality?

That is something where we have to of much
more stronger dialogue between the digitalization

industry, the startups.

To know what the business model is, and then
as legislators, react accordingly.

At least we in Germany see there is a lot
still to learn in order to understand their

business models and the way we are regulating
the energy market.

And the last point, but my colleague will
touch upon that, of course, a little bit in

detail.

Is that the energy transition will change
the world completely?

I think that is something we have learned
the last two days again in terms of innovation.

And it was said rightly before, be it technical
innovation, be it financial innovation, be

it legislative innovation.

It will change the world completely.

Towards new allies, towards new countries
which will do trade with each other.

Towards almost everything.

And I think that is very important.

Not having fear of that change.

But trying to use the opportunities.

And I think what is absolutely clear, that
if a single country or a region decides not

to be part of that energy transition, they
won't stop it at all.

It will happen.

And they will be the losers at the end of
the day.

So, that is also the point that it's not only
for climate reasons time to act, I think it's

for living reasons.

For the reason that an economy can survive
time to act.

Because otherwise the energy transition will
take place without taking advantage from a

certain economy in place.

So, I think that is something we have learned
a lot of other lessons learned, of course.

But that came to me when I heard the various
presentations, the panels that this is extremely

important.

I can assure that we as the German government
will continue our pathway.

Don't copy us.

Because that will be wrong.

No country is like Germany.

No country brought down the costs of renewables
that extensively and now has in its backpack

a lot of money sitting that we have to put
on the consumer's bill.

We thought it was good to invest in that asset
and we were proved right.

But you can learn from us and we can learn
from you.

And I think that is the very important point.

And if we continue understanding that learning
from each other is the key for a global world

which will lead us into the future into a
CO2free future, then I think we will see at

least the same amount of people.

At least the same high-level quality discussion
also in 2020.

And perhaps the remaining 55 countries which
have not sent their ministers or vice ministers

around will do so in 2020.

Thank you very much again for joining us.

And thanks a lot.


