The focus of our conversations around the energy 
transition is on changing the energy matrix and  

transforming our energy systems to move away 
from being fossil fuel-dependent. While this is  

important, and he we must we must also consider 
equally important element which is addressing  

energy poverty. It is also an energy access story. 
For billions of people today, people who lack  

access to clean, safe and reliable electricity, 
and for those who have no access to clean cooking,  

unless we provide them with - I'm so sorry, I 
can hear ... I have this background noise. I will  

continue. While we must cut emissions drastically, 
we must also deliver on sustainable development  

goals 7 which is achieving affordable, reliable, 
sustainable and modern energy form by 2030,  

yet we're not even close. Today, we still have 759 
million people who have no access to electricity,  

and 2.6 billion people without access to clean 
cooking. In Africa alone, which is where I come  

from, the numbers are also staggering. We 
have about 570 million people who have no  

access to electricity, and close to a 
billion without access to clean cooking.  

We also are far off track when we talk about 
investment. So when we keep talking about we  

want investment in clean renewable energy, what 
we found is we're lacking those investments,  

both in renewables in also clean cooking. For 
an example, clean cooking commitments in 2013,  

while roughly 133 million dollars, far 
short of the 5.4 billion dollars needed.  

These figures are significant because basic energy 
access is significant, not even talking about the  

different higher tiers that we really need for 
economic growth. We must achieve this, and we have  

to make sure we have a just and equitable energy 
transition that truly leaves no-one behind. We  

can't talk about energy transition and leave a 
billion people behind. We need a comprehensive  

approach backed by adequate and affordable 
financing to take us closer to a Net Zero future.  

Here's one example: at COP26 my country, Nigeria, 
announced its commitment to achieving Net Zero  

emissions by 2060, shared by a data energy 
transition plan and shared the pathway of how  

Nigeria can achieve Net Zero and achieve its 
energy poverty targets and industrialisation  

targets by 2060 but the plan is estimated to cost 
$1.9 trillion between now and 2060 of which 410  

billion is above the business-as-usual spending. 
It is the electrification of an entire economy.  

We feel it is important. When we talk about 
energy transition, we need to take the developing  

countries along, we need to show them how they can 
address their needs using a low-carbon pathway and  

we need to get behind that as a global audience 
to fund it. That is what I'm here to say today:  

we must have much bolder ambition to accelerate 
finance and implementation on ground,  

to make sure that we achieve our net zero target 
while not leaving anybody behind. Thank you.


