With me to discuss this very, very important 
subject I have the pleasure of introducing to you  

four amazing startup founders who have contributed 
to innovation and are award winners of the startup  

energy transition. So, I'm going to ask 
my panelists, when I introduce your name,  

kindly give a nod or a little wave so 
the audience can know who you are.
 

I would like to start introduce the CEO of Kraft 
we can, and that is Sascha Kuhn. And next to him  

we have Aylin Ozkarakas, the CEO of -- 
sorry, the chief of staff, I beg your pardon.  

The chief of staff of village data analytics. 
And we have next to her, Claudia Rothe,  

project manager of ecoligo. And finally, we have 
Sebastian Berning who is the CEO of Instagrid.
 

And then sitting to my far right is the founder 
and the creator of startup transition awards,  

the SET awards we call it in short. And that 
is Mr. Andreas Kuhlmann. Now, before we come  

back and really get into understanding how 
this four people come to be sitting with us,  

I would like to ask Mr. Andreas to tell 
us a few words. And how do you feel  

seeing these four individuals on stage today?
Thank you, Linda. I'm very happy to have this  

panel today. Before I say a few words, and then 
the fifth startup on stage. That's you, Linda.  

You're working a startup as well. That's very 
important. Next time we have you as an interview.
 

Thank you.
When we created this energy transition award, for  

us it was important to create a global network on 
innovation. Connecting minds for a greater good.  

Since then, we have had 2700 applications of 
startups. And I think we did indeed create  

a great network of startups. And those we see 
here on stage, unfortunately are not from all  

over the world. But from a special part of this 
world only that is due to the corona. But they are  

here in the name of all the others. And I think 
it is super-important that this conference focuses  

on innovation. Because if we do not scale those 
smart ideas, business models and innovation,  

we will never be able to reach our climate 
targets. That's why the panel is here, and  

that's why I'm here. And thanks for listening.
Thank you very much for those very kind remarks.  

Excellent. So, how we're going to spend the next 
30 or 40 minutes is firstly I'm gonna give the  

panelists a chance to just tell us a little bit 
about your organization, the problems you are  

solving. You know, perhaps 4 minutes each. And 
then after that, we're gonna go into a discussion  

where we're going to go do a deeper dive into 
what your future plans are. We are a startup,  

but obviously we have growth plans, right? What 
your future plans are. And the next thing we're  

gonna discuss is how specifically those plans fit 
into our climate goals. And then we'll discuss  

a little bit about how the current policies 
actually support you in what you would like to see  

differently as far as a policy framework is. And 
then finally, I'm gonna ask you to make a little  

bit of a comment around how your innovations 
would fit into the current political environment  

and what we're doing. So, a little bit of a 
comment around how you see your work as solving  

some of these global problems. That is the last 
thing we're going to end up with our discussion.
 

So, without further ado, 
I'm gonna ask you, Dr. Kuhn,  

CEO Kraftwerk to tell us about your innovation.
Thank you. Thank you for the nice introduction.  

Yeah, Kraftwerk is a company that 
developed a new soled oxide fuel cell  

that's different to other fuel cells. 
We started already 20 years ago in  

fundamental research on this technology. We 
developed the new nanotechnology and nan know  

technologic with the stabilized zirconia. And that 
is part of the fuel cell that we now can produce.  

And it is used in several applications. Not 
only in standard fuel cells, but also in fuel  

batteries or in electrolyzers. So, it louse to 
produce methane or other gases like hydrogen and  

ammonia and other E-fuels with 
very high efficiencies. Up to 90%.  

And that is important technology for the next 
time. Because we need to transport the technology.  

We need to transport the electricity to -- to 
the place where it is needed. Example given,  

in a car or into an airplane. And therefore, 
this has to be done with very high efficiencies.
 

And on the airplanes, for example, with our 
technology we can then produce electricity  

out of the E-fuels again. Also with very 
high efficiencies. And that is a way to get  

natural energy, solar energy, into 
the application where it is needed.
 

Fantastic. You actually raise a very good 
point close to my heart. You know, just  

minimizing transmission losses is something that 
we definitely recognize in Africa. But certainly  

your technology is very, very advanced. 
You know, fantastic. Brilliant. Just really  

reducing demand and reusing it. Over 
to you, Aylin. And just introduce your  

organization and the problems you're solving.
Sure. Thank you, Linda. So, at Village Data  

Analytics we have created a data platform which 
serves as a basis for planning energy systems.  

So, what we do is we fuse different data sources 
such as satellite imagery, statistical data,  

server data, smart meter data, IoT data, just 
lots of different sources. And we bring them  

together into one map. From here, our users can 
then analyze, plan, and monitor energy projects.  

They can interactively collaborate in it. And 
yeah, just save a lot of resources when it comes  

to developing and executing such projects. For 
example, we would have let's say a government  

working alongside financiers, investors on a 
project. And they could then collaborate through  

VDAN with the developers without having to be 
in the same time zone or location. They can just  

work within this digital twin that we create.
And what we do currently -- so, we work mainly in  

developing and emerging countries in Africa and 
Asia. But also in Germany with municipalities.  

But, for example, we are just in the progress of 
a project that is also very close to my heart with  

the government of the Democratic Republic of 
Congo. And the IFC. And this is a very, very large  

project to replace diesel generators. And also 
we're working with the government of Pakistan to  

digitize the grid. And yeah. We just recently 
also partnered with a German electricity supplier.  

A lot of very exciting things coming up.
That have been. Great, great work. And thank  

you for sharing the information about the markets 
that you work in. Brilliant. And we'll come back  

and dive into how, you know, we can interact more 
with your organizations. Yeah. But for now I would  

like to hand over to Miss Claudia. And perhaps 
you can tell us a little bit about ecoligo.
 

Thank you, Linda. Ecoligo is a global energy as a 
service provider, supplying businesses in markets  

with clean manager. We design and operate the 
clean energy in the markets where they can have  

the highest CO2 impact. And finance them here 
in Germany through the crowd investing platform,  

ecoligo investments. We were founded in 2017, and 
I'm part of a team of 30 people spread around the  

globe. We started in Ghana. One of the first 
projects we realized was also together with the  

German energy agencies with the renewable 
energy program. It was the bank in Ghana.  

We had the support there. And the 
next market we entered was Kenya.  

Now active in South America, Latin America, and 
Asia with Thailand being part of our markets.
 

and yes, we're headquartered here in Berlin. We 
have achieved 166 projects which are 66 megawatts.  

And our emerging markets. We have a chocolate 
producer in Ghana. They just built a new  

chocolate factory and we provides them with 
the finance and the operation and maintenance  

of the solar rooftop system on their factory.
 

We also have, for example, manufacturing 
businesses. The reusable bag producer in Vietnam.  

Or a fair trade flour farm, rose farm, actually, 
produces roses in Kenya. What they all have in  

common is high energy costs from the grid. And 
we are here to solve that problem by offering  

them our energy as a service solution which means 
they enter into a leasing or power purchasing with  

us where they pay monthly fees for the systems 
built on their grounds. The solar PV systems.  

We finance them here in Germany with the crowd. 
And this is the part that I'm responsible for.  

The crowd investing platform who has to now 
raised over 21 million Euros by just 3600 crowd  

investors. A number I'm super-proud of. We have 
a very loyal crowd who make that happen so far.
 

And yes, we take basically care of all the rest. 
The client doesn't need to have any knowledge.  

And they don't need to invest any capital 
in it because they pay off the solar system  

during the contract duration with us. And 
what's best about it, they also save money  

because our solution officer cheaper 
kilowatt hour prices than they would  

get from the utility on-site in the location. 
This is probably one of the reasons why  

we won a SET award last year. Really the 
innovation in our business model where we  

create this win-win-win situation for the crowd 
investors in Germany who gain 5 to 6% of interest.  

Compared a large number of interest in leaving 
money in the bank account at the moment.  

Clients who save money. And us making 
our margin, of course, in the contracts.
 

Wow.
Thank you.
 

I'm just curious and we can come back to it 
later. You work specifically in the solar space.
 

We would like to enlarge our product range 
to other projects to other technologies  

and energy efficient measures in the future.
Thank you. Thank you for sharing that. Finally  

I would like to have on stage -- have the mic, 
Sebastian Berning. Who is as I said the CEO  

of Instagrid. Tell us about your organization.
Thank you. So, at Instagrid we're on a mission to  

ultimately remove up to 1 billion combustion 
engines from the global energy system.  

We're talking about diesel 
generators, for example,  

and small energies that you need 
for -- for coal chain logistics.  

So, they are basically everywhere. And we want 
to replace them with advanced mobile batteries.
 

So, instead of generating electricity or other 
forms of energy on-site from small combustion  

engines which is a huge problem which is rarely 
addressed in the public. We're all talking about  

energies and road transport. And we have a lot 
of famous companies looking after replacing  

these. This is really something that has been 
overlooked so far, at least in our opinion.  

So, what we are doing is instead of local 
generation, which is extremely inefficient,  

we -- we turn to larger sources of electricity 
like a large PV plant that we heard about before.  

And we do the last mile. Like last mile 
electricity by means of super-portable,  

but very capable advanced batteries. So, the 
reason we're doing this. First of all, of course,  

we want to stop all these -- these combustion 
engines from contributing to global warming by  

burning billions of liters of fuel every day. 
And secondly, we want cleaner air because  

a single one of these engines is -- could be 
polluting in terms of smog-forming emissions.
 

Similarly to about 100 modern cars. So, this 
is in terms of NOX and particulate matter,  

it's a huge problem. And third, we 
want -- we want that these engines  

stop eating the money from basically probably 
the poorest economies on our planet. Because  

people generally with the lowest or the least 
access to electricity, they pay the highest rates  

as probably every one of you is aware of. 
So, we really believe in forming grids,  

forming last-mile grids for regional electricity 
supply by means of advanced batteries.
 

So far we are only operating in Europe. We have a 
very simple business model. We're kind of selling  

these devices to the end customers which are 
usually in construction, for example. I cannot  

tell that our customers have a dirty business. But 
there is a lot to do on that site, let's put it  

this way. And it's -- it's definitely something 
that we're really proud that have we see a lot  

of traction in this sector and now we're moving 
forward to supply other sectors with energy.
 

Fantastic. You know, I'm curious how you know 
and maybe in the next round you can address this.  

I'm curious about how you think about the life 
cycle of batteries. Because battery technology  

obviously, how long do they last? And then what do 
you do at the end of the battery life? Perhaps you  

can -- you can address that in the next round.
Now we have a bit of an impression of what this  

four amazing individuals do. So, I'm 
gonna give you a chance to, you know,  

look down the next 3, 5 years. And tell us a 
little bit more about what is the next frontier  

for your startup? You know? What are you 
looking to grow into a 3 to 5 year time frame?
 

Yeah. That's good question. And looking in 
the future, it's not to easy. But for us, it's  

that we got some contracts with major automotive 
and airplane industry players. So, for example,  

Airbus, Nissan and even Volkswagen are on 
our contractor list. And to be able to supply  

later on to such industries, it's always needed 
that you have several metrics and that's the  

one -- so, we are trying to build modern this 
one giga factory now. And that is not so easy.  

Because we don't have much time for it.
And that's the major topic that we have on our  

list. And therefore we need partners, of course. 
Have to build up our -- yeah -- community.
 

Yeah. You took the words right out 
of my mouth. Now, what partners do  

you need? Obviously financing is one of the 
ingredients we need for growth and future.  

And then also the right partners that kind of 
cooperation and collaboration. Thank you for  

raising that. Now, over to you, Aylin. What does 3 
to 5 years look like and how are you plugging into  

the energy transition with your future plans?
Well, we obviously will continue to engage with  

public and private sector partners to help 
scale and accelerate the energy transition  

and the energy access globally. And what we 
are realizing is that energy access or SDG7 is  

basically the foundation for all other SDGs and 
all other developmental initiatives as well. So,  

we are experiencing many new use cases that our 
product can be beneficial for. For example, with  

projects in healthcare, in agriculture, which is 
going to be huge in the upcoming years, obviously.  

And so, we're currently, yeah. Looking at new 
markets that always connect to energy access  

and using this platform to help analyze. And 
also on the long-term monitor such projects.
 

Brilliant. Thank you. Thank you. Data 
definitely an enabling platform for sure.  

Fantastic. I'm going to turn over to you, 
Claudia, and answer that same question.  

What does it look like for you at ecoligo?
Yes. So, in the next 3 to 5 years, we want to roll  

out our solution in other markets, other emerging 
markets where the regulatory environment allows us  

because we need a liberalized energy market for 
that, of course. And also not highly-subsidized  

energy costs. And as you pointed out, we focus at 
the moment strongly on solar PV systems. But we  

are already looking into more energy-efficiency 
and we want to -- and other technologies so we  

can approach a customer's or business energy 
supply more holistically. And we want to offer  

a solution also for, yep. Energy efficiency, 
solar, water, mobility is a big topic for us. And  

another one, of course, will be batteries. We see 
the decreasing prices of batteries and how they,  

of course, at the moment our customers are only 
grid-connected customers. So, it doesn't play such  

a huge role for them at the moment. But there 
is the demand to become even more independent  

from the utilities. So, we can in the future 
couple our solar systems with energy storage.
 

This is on -- this is on the side in the markets 
where we built our products. On the financing  

side, I really want to roll out our platform 
in other EU countries. Because at the moment,  

it's only possible for German investors to invest. 
And only active in Germany. This is where --  

where our projects are financed at the moment. But 
I think there's so much huge potential in crowd  

funding in general. The EU regulation is there and 
we need to take the next steps and implement it.  

Also offer new products like a green 
bond. Also in the beginning of this year,  

we started with a second financial pillar 
for our project finance. Because as we grow  

also our project sizes grow in the markets. And 
we need also institutional partners who finance  

together with the crowd. And one collaboration 
we already did was with eCO Credit which we  

announced in the beginning of this year and 
they're financing a portfolio of projects in Ghana  

and Kenya already with our crowd. And we want to 
have more collaborations like this in the future.
 

Fantastic. You know, you touched on 
some policy, policy work as well.  

That's great. Because that bring us to the next 
discussion. Andreas, I'm gonna ask you after  

Sebastian speaks just if you have 
any impressions on the ambitious  

plans that the panelists have talked about. 
But first I'm gonna ask Sebastian to give us  

his -- his 3 to 5 year, you know, what is 
it that your organization is working on?
 

Yes. So, as I said before, we are to date 
producing batteries and we're selling them  

directly to end customers which is a hugely 
successful business. But on the other hand,  

we believe that ultimately we should 
be the owners of all of our batteries.  

We believe that batteries are inherently an asset 
that should be operated in a circular fashion.  

So, we really want to move on and offer services. 
You know? We want to do that last mile electricity  

delivery and really become the owner of the 
-- of all of our assets in the future. I hope,  

you know, we can explain that to our investors. 
And then be responsible end-to-end for, you know,  

getting the electricity in a reliable fashion 
to the end customer. We also want to do that in  

vastly different applications all over the world.
We believe that this is the energy distribution is  

actually a general problem. I think every 
single economy that is turning towards  

renewable energies is facing distribution 
problems, is facing the problem. How can we  

build distribution capabilities fast enough 
and on the right scale? I think we can  

offer an answer for many of these problems if we 
manage to build the right service infrastructure  

and the right asset management on all of 
these devices that we want to produce.
 

No, that's great and that resonates with me as 
well in the project that I'm working on. So,  

evacuating energy from where it is being produced 
to where it's being -- to where it's needed is a  

challenge that is, you know, for now quite costly, 
right? Because then we're asking the utilities  

to build, to extend their lines. And then we've 
talked about power losses and things like that.  

So, certainly we'll be watching your advancements 
and wishing you all the best. Our special guest,  

I do not know whether you have some comments 
based on the two questions we have discussed.  

Just some words of encouragement as well.
Maybe briefly before I unfortunately have to go.  

What we see already is a wonderful idea of how 
these business models could scale up and how good  

that would be for the global energy transition. 
Again, you see there are some policy issues  

and there are some network issues. And I think 
that is exactly why this is so important to bring  

them on stage on such a conference. Because 
we have to discuss policy issues in order to  

scale up those ideas. And we have to bring people 
together in this kind of network. Where we just  

have to encourage everybody to invest in these 
things. And that's the task we at the German  

Energy Agency will try to fulfill. And yeah. Maybe 
that's what I see again when I hear them speak.
 

Fantastic. Excellent. And that was 
just a fantastic cue to the next  

subject I wanted us to discuss. Is are you 
supported? Thank you very much, our special  

guest Andreas and founder of the SET Awards. 
Thank you for your presence and your comments.
 

So, are we supported? Are we supported by the 
policies within the markets within which you  

work? This will be the opportunity to maybe 
tell us what's working, which policies are  

working for you, and where you would like to 
see some changes. And I'm gonna start with you.
 

Again.
Yes, again.
 

It's not an easy question.
It's not an easy question.  

You get to set the stage for us.
I will try.
 

Thank you.
At the moment, I think  

it's a good time for our technology.
Yeah.
 

And the supportive network from 
politics and everything is there.
 

Good.
But what is needed is more support for startups.  

Because the first years to go to this stage 
were very hard. And I think there are other  

good inventors out there. And there are a lot of 
other startups out there that need more support.  

And we need more rules because they go in such 
high risks with the things they are doing to  

bring up such industries and to bring up such new 
startups. And to go the first years is very hard.
 

And there is much more support needed. And the 
risks have to be seen. I mean, if there's a corona  

crisis, no one has to apply for insolvency 
processes. But startups are always in a higher  

risks in a corona crisis. Much higher risks.
Yeah.
 

And there's a lot of these 
rules that have to be, yeah.  

Adapted for such. Especially technology startups 
because they have the highest risks. We just have  

to invest in the technology and so on.
Yeah. I think putting on my  

startup founder hat, you know, what you 
say absolutely resonated with me. Because,  

you know, going into the COVID period, you know, 
we raising funds and really influencing the  

policy environment happened. And then this global 
event for me anyway, just completely wiped out,  

you know, two years of opportunity. Because 
in an emerging market where I work in,  

the -- the investors felt that they might 
have to do more of a public health response.  

So, no more of the energy because it wasn't seen 
as a critical emergency in the light of COVID. So,  

having the right policy frameworks where 
we keep the agenda of energy access,  

of the energy transition front and center. So, 
it is not kind of put to one side. You know?  

Because of something else bigger happening. For 
example, right now we have the conflict in -- the  

war in Ukraine as well. And then you are finding 
governments moving towards, you know, responding  

to that crisis to the detriment of providing the 
necessary support that is needed with all this  

other issues that we are trying to solve, right?
The lack of energy was slow moving, right? With  

the climate change slowly building up and it's 
now really become an energy such as what we  

have been told. Definitely a stable policy 
environment is something that I absolutely  

resonate with. But I'm really encouraged 
that you say that for your organization,  

the policy environment is supportive for now. That 
is a very rare statement. For where I come from,  

the policy environment is usually quite unstable.
Anyways. So, I'm curious to know whether  

Village Data, you know, what would 
you like to see differently? What's  

working in the policy environment and 
what changes would you like to see?
 

For us, being a data and software solution, 
I think we don't come across as many policies  

in governance that people do that work with 
resolutions or have a closer linkage to the actual  

development of things. So, I have to say, I have 
-- I have had a very beautiful experience of the  

ambition that the government and the policymakers 
are making. I know there is -- there is always  

stereotypical like the cliche in the private 
sector that public sector is so slow and nothing  

happens. And digitization is moving so slow. But 
I really have to say I have witnessed firsthand  

that there are really, really big steps being made 
to use solutions like hours to implement them in  

organizations where things like this are 
a bureaucratic nightmare. they push for it  

and speed it up and want the benefits to 
reach the end beneficiaries. That's really,  

really nice thing to watch and witness.
I agree with you, Linda, that it has been --  

I would say a painful experience to see that this 
war accelerated the whole energy transition topic  

in Europe once again. Where I thought it's just -- 
yeah. Sad to see that something like this had to  

happen to get another gear up that could have been 
done without such a tragic side event happening.  

But as some of the speakers yesterday 
also said that a crisis is always also  

bringing up opportunities which I'm glad 
that many of the nations are taking now.
 

Absolutely. Never let a good crisis go to waste. 
And certainly this one touches on a subject near  

and dear to us as the Energy Transition. That's 
very powerful. Thank you for reminding that.  

Reminding us of that, Aylin. Claudia, your 
thoughts as well? You started to discuss  

how the policy framework supports you. 
So, perhaps you can do a deeper dive  

into that. What would you like to see changed?
Yes. Yep. For us, the -- our business model  

works on its own. We don't need any -- in the 
energy market, we only need a liberalized energy  

market where it's possible that anybody can 
sell energy. There's no monopolies on that.  

And we need on the other hand, though, our clear 
regulations and standardized processes to get  

supplier license, for example, to be 
able to sell the power to our clients.
 

We see that in some markets. 
In other markets it's more  

fluid, flexible. There's certain new movements.
You can say Kenya, you can say Kenya.
 

You got the reference. There's always surprise. 
But, of course, business has to, of course,  

also anticipate. On the -- and also, feed 
in tariffs, and metering systems, they help,  

especially when you deal with businesses. Because 
they close on the weekends, for example. Don't  

produce, but the solar system produces power. 
So, it could be fed into the grid. And wouldn't  

go to waste. On the other hand, coming back 
to Germany and to the policy that I mentioned,  

it's the European crowd funding 
service provider regime which is  

a long word for a simple passporting solution. 
So, you apply for one license, for example,  

in Germany, in one EU country. And you 
can offer your solution, the transparent  

and direct green investment opportunities that we 
have, we could offer them in other EU countries.
 

This is what the E U wants. And they put 
in a beautiful implementation. However,  

the German implementation of the law puts 
employees like me into personal liability.  

No one wants to take that. We hope with the German 
government, with the new government might look  

into this again, it puts on a brake from rolling 
out from Germany into the European crowd market.  

This is a thing where you have a working 
business model. You are innovative. But  

then -- and also the political will is there. But 
it stopped -- yeah, at this point implementation.
 

Thank you. Sounds like it's solvable situation.
Hopefully, yes. Maybe not in Germany.
 

Yeah. Excellent. Thank you. 
Over to you, Sebastian.
 

So, I think overall I must say that there 
has probably never been a better time to be  

a climate tech entrepreneur.
Wow.
 

We started four years ago. I also say that 
was pre-Greta. Just a little bit before  

Fridays for Future caught public attention. 
We started as a productivity solution. Because  

we knew that like anything in the eco area would 
have probably scared away investors that burned  

a lot of money in the decade before. You wouldn't 
have gotten attention for this. So, just us being  

on this panel today, for example, and having a 
prize with a lot of visibility in the media, et  

cetera. That's really valuable. And I think that's 
things that -- yeah. Weren't available before. And  

so, we mostly have everything today that we 
need. We got -- we have access to capital.  

Even venture capital is back in that 
market. And they're betting big today.
 

We see that policy is changing at a speed that, 
you know, wasn't heard of. I agree that trigger  

is probably something that we would have liked to 
avoid. But I think the most important policy that  

we need is that the alternatives for clean energy 
that we stop subsidizing them. Basically many  

countries are still subsidizing fossil fuels. And 
what we really need is the carbon taxation that  

we start seeing. So, to give really energy a fair 
market value. And then I don't think that any real  

clean energy company needs public support 
anymore. You know? Just be sure that we have  

fair market conditions that we stop subsidizing 
what we don't want to have anymore. And I think  

there are a lot of companies that will flourish 
and change the energy system for the better.
 

Yeah. Absolutely. Now, thank you. This is 
definitely a rare first for me. To sit with  

entrepreneurs who feel for the most part supported 
by their policy frameworks. That's fantastic. So,  

for new innovators out there, you know, I 
want to echo what Sebastian has said. It's  

never been a better time to be a climate 
innovator. That is something that I am going to  

take with me. And maybe start to believe in my 
own space and, you know, as I'm sure you've all  

got your founder's stories. You know? Quite a few 
bruises. But certainly the word of hope is very,  

very powerful. There's never been a better 
time to be a climate entrepreneur. Fantastic.
 

Well, panelists, I'm gonna press a little bit more 
in the last set of 10 minutes in our conference  

here. And, you know, we started to touch on 
that issue about resilience. And right now  

obviously the topic on everyone's mind is we've 
got the COVID-19 that is still going. A lot of us  

want to think it is gone. It is still with us. Now 
we've got the compounding geopolitical matters.  

As an east African Kenyan, you know, we've got 
drought conditions. Extreme drought conditions  

that are really impacting the most vulnerable 
amongst us. We have forgotten that we had a  

locust invasion, you know, in East Africa. 
Maybe you heard about it, maybe you didn't.  

But all of these vulnerabilities have really 
come to show that we cannot innovate fast  

enough. Right? The work that you're doing 
is basically needed yesterday. Right? So,  

again, for all the -- all the innovators out 
there looking to the energy space, you know,  

we really do need all hands on deck. And make sure 
that we are working together cooperatively as we  

have been encouraged to make this a reality.
So, with those few words, you know, you want  

to again perhaps have you drill down more how your 
specific innovation helps support vulnerabilities.  

Vulnerable communities who are the first to 
feel the effects of climate change. Right?  

Developed nations. They have adaptation 
capability from a financing standpoint.  

Maybe from a technological standpoint. But 
that is not equal across the world. So,  

just thinking through how your innovation has 
a global platform. And how your innovation  

helps protect the most vulnerable amongst us in 
the first hit when climate change is a reality.  

And that's a big one. And Dr. Kuhn, I'm going 
to spare you this one and I'm going to ask  

Sebastian to start this one for us. 
And then we'll come down this way.
 

Thank you.
You're welcome.
 

Yes. We're doing this round backwards.
Yes.
 

Yes. So,  

I'm going to make it short. I think it is always 
best if you give people tools. I'm a huge believer  

in giving people the tools to act on. And what we 
give the people today in Europe is a possibility  

to actually take matter into their own hands. They 
don't need to wait for anything to be invented.  

But they can't -- they have a solution to take 
clean energy and to use it in their everyday work.  

And they have the decision. It's a decision 
they can take together. They -- today, you know,  

they have to purchase something. They get their 
money back. It's a good investment. And this is  

the same thing I want to apply in general. And we 
want to make tools for people and especially for  

smaller communities to act on. As you said before, 
I don't want to keep waiting for a utility to take  

the arbitrary decision to connect my house to 
the grid. I can take things into my own hands.
 

Maybe someday I can take out my smartphone 
and push a button in the app and say I need  

electricity and someone is going 
to deliver that electricity to me.  

And if I'm a good customer and the whole thing 
turns well, then in the next stage I'm going to be  

investable also. I'm paying my bills. Someone 
might put a landline to my house, or someone  

might bullet a rooftop PV system on my house. And, 
you know, we can enforce that cycle. You know? We  

can go forward. But I really would like to see 
that everyone has something they can do now to  

improve their situation, to act on climate change. 
And to take the first step. And I think a lot of  

people, they just feel -- there's this fear 
of, you know, something coming up. And what  

you really want is really a possibility to change 
things. And to take things into your own hands.
 

Fabulous. Democratizing energy.
Hopefully. It's a very big aim.
 

Absolutely.
And I really see  

all of the solutions we heard together are 
kind of puzzle pieces in getting that done.
 

I like that. That's very 
powerful. Thank you. Claudia.
 

That was really a great cue for our 
democratization, actually. Because this is  

us being present only in emerging markets. 
And having implementing our solution  

there is already doing some of that work. So, we 
are producing the energy where it is consumed.  

Already contributing to the decentralized power 
supply that -- and we don't need for a grid to  

develop that clean energy and go to the energy 
transition. We are making it possible now and  

fast. We're fast in our implementation also 
because the clients don't need any up front  

capital because it's brought from the developed 
world into the countries where it's needed.
 

and also with that, yeah, since our beginning, of 
course, since our clients do not need to invest  

any capital into renewable energy solutions, they 
can focus on their core business. And access to  

finance for them is really in those markets more 
-- yeah. They are very, very important and they  

can put it into their core business and strengthen 
the businesses and with that the communities  

around them. Because they have, of course, 
more security for their employees, et cetera.
 

So, this is something we are already doing 
today and with rolling out in more markets and  

helping our clients to become more independent 
of the grid and more independent also of fossil  

fuels. I think we can really, yeah, take a lot 
of the challenges that we are seeing right now  

and that as you rightly put, this is said that 
this is put to the agenda now only because of  

this. Because of this war. But yeah. It's yeah. 
A good crisis that we would -- we need to use.
 

Absolutely. Yes.
Well, in our case, this last question is  

basically the core of our mission.
Yeah.
 

So, as I said in our introduction, our main 
markets are the developing countries. When I talk  

about the technology that we use and develop, it's 
like speaking of Earth observation data and data  

platforms. This all sounds like or is a very, very 
sophisticated state-of-the-art technology, but  

what we're doing with it is essentially bringing 
light into the data darkness that is currently  

the situation in those geographical areas. And 
to shed light on this. Like we work in places,  

for instance, rural areas in lots of African 
countries where it is not known how many people  

live in a village. Or if they have infrastructure 
there. Or what type of commercial activities they  

have. And now imagine investors or governments 
wanting to bring development and wanting to  

channel investments into those places without 
knowing enough about the basic conditions. And  

yeah. So, I see this as absolutely the -- 
our top priority that we're trying to solve  

with our technology that these things can be 
catalyzed there on scale. And with fast speed.
 

Yeah. I couldn't agree more. Could not agree 
more. Data, absolutely powerful. Yeah, yeah.
 

Yeah. It's a risky situation we are in, I think. 
There is not much more fossil fuel available  

at the moment. And that's a major problem 
for the whole planet and for our regions.
 

Some would argue that we 
have quite a few reserves.
 

Yeah, we have 50% of the reserves, I would 
guess. But that means that we from now on  

will not be able to produce more. We will 
produce less every day. And that's -- that's  

the point where wars will start because 
everyone wants to have those percents.  

And it's a risky situation we are 
in. And it's more risky for the  

states that are not as powerful. And now we 
depend on this last reserves. And we have to  

power up the renewable energy resources. And we 
have to do that fast. And we have to do the second  

thing, which we are working on, to raise the 
efficiency level. You know, with our technology,  

you can reach up to 90% of production 
of electricity, for example. Whereas the  

standard model reaches about 25 to 30%. It's 
a huge difference that you have. A factor of  

three depending on the application a factor of 
five. And having five times the amount of energy  

is filling up those few percents. And 
we need -- we need a lot of energy also  

to build more solar cells. They 
are not produced by nothing.
 

If you want to raise the amount of solar cells 
and wind power, then you have to invest energy.  

And that's -- that's the risk we are in. And we 
don't rely only on these power sources, but also  

on raw materials. And that's the next critical 
point because there is not cobalt available  

for more than 10 years and so, with lithium cobalt 
cells we will not reach anything. And lithium  

is also fully in the hands of China. And if we 
have to apply sanctions because they start wars,  

we are in a very risky situation. I don't hope it 
will come to that point. But as I started with,  

the risks are getting higher now.
Yeah.
 

So, we have to vastly improve the efficiency 
levels. So, we have to invest in fuel cells. And  

we have to invest in all other energy sectors.
No, that's absolutely -- absolutely powerful.  

And god forbid any of that happens with -- with 
the interdependencies that we have seen that have  

been thrown open with the current events.
So, ladies and gentlemen, you can see for  

yourself, you have heard for yourselves how these 
four individuals and the organizations that they  

represent absolutely are in the cutting edge of 
innovations towards our 2030 climate goals. You've  

heard their success stories, you've heard how 
they've entered new markets, how they brought in  

new technologies. How they're applying technology 
integrated into -- into platforms that can then be  

used in a democratic fashion. You know? That is 
absolutely powerful. So, I want to congratulate  

you four again. But I also know there are quite 
a few winners. Since the SET was invented or,  

you know, came to life 6 years ago. So, as we go 
into our final round of comments, you know, I want  

you to, you know, just, you know, conclude with 
your final thoughts about this conference. Your  

final thoughts about being a SET Award winner. 
But most importantly, I would like you to spare  

some words of encouragement that you can share 
with other innovators out there who are looking to  

advance SDG7. Right? That would be very, very 
powerful for all the young people. And maybe not  

so young like myself who are listening to you 
and how you managed to succeed. A couple words  

of encouragement that we can take away. Will 
be powerful. I'm certainly taking away, it's  

never been a better time to be climate innovator. 
That's really going to stay with me for a while.
 

So, help me close the panel by giving us your 
final words. And your encouraging words. Yeah.  

I think you can start with that.
Yeah. So, be part of the SET awards.
 

Yes!
For us, it was really helpful to  

win the SET awards last year. Because it gives 
you a lot of a platform that you really need.
 

And the platform, of course, 
is a visibility. You are here.
 

Yes.
What else  

are you encouraging others that they're going to 
receive that you've received from the SET Award?
 

It's also credibility that you get because it's 
a huge community that checked on the technology  

in the background. A lot of professors that are 
really well known and have a lot of experience in  

these topics.
Fantastic, fantastic.  

Excellent. How about you, Aylin?
So, my takeaway is definitely the strength of  

partnership that is needed but is also happening 
between the public and private sector. And I was  

very excited about having the professor here on 
the first day who was promoting this very strongly  

that we need a very strong partnership here. And 
that especially the public sector needs to be  

involved even more. Not only as a regulator, but 
also in participating to move this all forward.  

And my words of encouragement would probably, 
Sebastian, inspired by what you said before, go to  

investors and the people with the money saying 
that they should really come along and continue on  

this path that is happening. But also, get into it 
and invest in the future rather than in the past.
 

Fantastic. Excellent. Yep. 
Claudia, your remarks, please?
 

Yes. I think with energy transition having 
it done worldwide. I see it globally and also  

make the energy transition a just one. This is 
what was discussed this morning. Is I think very,  

very important to always keep that 
in mind. And when we talk about that,  

it's also talking about economic development. 
It has to go hand in hand with that. From  

the -- encouraging words from a startup that's 
now 7 years old. It's all about realizing your  

first -- I think you can all agree -- realizing 
your first project and demonstrating that it's  

working. And partnerships with the German 
energy agencies and other support team, yeah,  

public partners, you can get your foot into 
the market. You can also enter new markets with  

the support from the public. And I think when 
you believe, yeah, in your solution. And it's  

tackling those SDGs and the Climate Goals, 
you should go ahead and move forward.
 

Fantastic. No, thank you. Last, 
but not least, Sebastian.
 

Yes. So, a lot of takeaways from my 
side. Maybe the most important was  

walking away from a corporate career that I was 
in before and actually starting my own business.  

It was a hugely rewarding experience. So, I 
really want to recommend to everyone out there who  

is -- I think entrepreneurship is probably not for 
everyone. But everyone who has thought about it,  

who wants to do it, I would say try it, go ahead. 
You know, there's -- whatever you think of, there  

is probably a customer out there who was waiting 
for you to come by and offer that solution.  

And there's nothing better the moment when you 
realize, oh, I have actually solved a problem that  

has been there before. So, for me, that was always 
really important. I think also if you consider  

entrepreneurship, I want to encourage everyone 
to really work on the problems that matter.  

We see a lot of talent going into, I don't know, 
NFTs, et cetera. There -- I think that we have  

huge problems out there. And the transformation of 
the energy system is probably one of the biggest  

challenges that we ever had. So, I really want 
to encourage people to work on these problems and  

really, yeah, join us or any of the other 
startups. So, if you don't want to found your  

own company, there are a lot of quickly-growing 
companies that need all the talent they can get.  

And I -- I promise you it's going to be as 
rewarding working for a company with a vision,  

with a mission to change things as founding 
your own. And yeah. And that's really something  

we all need people to join us. We're not lonely 
entrepreneurs here. We enjoy having the greatest  

talent with us to move things. And I hope we can 
make this a movement, actually. You know? So,  

it doesn't really matter which movement you're 
-- or which of the companies you join or if you  

found your own, but in the end it's really 
important that you start taking action.  

And here we have it again. You know? It's your 
chance to take action to do something about it.  

And I think that's what we all did.
And we want to encourage others or at least  

I want to encourage others to do the same.
Fantastic. Absolutely a powerful last round  

from each of our speakers. We have heard, you 
know, just literally, you know, solve problems and  

just as we are doing here on stage. And I really 
like that. Find problems that actually matter.  

And I would like to offer that the climate 
change energy issue is a problem worth  

your time. Thank you very much, panelists. And 
I wish you all the best. We will be cheering on  

and hoping for your continued success. Especially 
as we protect the most vulnerable amongst us  

with your innovations. Act local, think global.  

Those are the words that I would leave us 
with. Thank you very much for joining us today  

in celebrating this amazing startups at -- you 
know, at the SET innovation panel. Thank you. 


