One of the most significant contemporary challenges
of our time is the need to satisfy growing

energy demand while simultaneously reducing
greenhouse gas emissions associated with the

production, delivery and consumption of energy.
How can our energy needs be better understood

and accounted for across entire energy value
chains and product life cycles? How can demand

be met across all sectors efficiently and
with more renewables?

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, good morning,
and please allow me to add my own welcome

to day 2 of the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.
It is great to be back with you, and I know

you've already gotten a great start with the
ministers' thought-provoking keynotes as well

as the dialogue with Patricia Espinosa on
the crucial link between energy transition

and climate protection. Now we want to continue
straightaway with a plenary looking at a key

tool for doing both, for promoting the global
Enengiewende, and also protecting the climate.

Our focus is: industry and decarbonisation.
Industry is, along with transportation, and

I think all of us are aware of this, THE fastest
growing source of greenhouse gas emissions

worldwide. We need to move faster to decarbonise
the travel sector. The task is complex because

of links to other sectors like transportation
and power, and secondly, because of many industries

extended supply chains. What qualities are
- what qualifies as carbon-neutral is by no

means self-evident, of course, but depends
on assessing the entire value chain of a product,

a fuel, or a technology. And whether you're
a policy-maker, or an investor, you need to

weigh the different sources of impact of energy,
to make decisions about how to channel financial

flows and structure markets. In this panel,
we want to hear what the challenges look like

in practice, and ask what kind of tools and
technologies policy-makers and managers need

as they move to decarbonise the industrial
sector? It is a great pleasure to welcome

our high-level panel. I will keep our introductions
brief in order to maximise our time for discussion.

I begin here with Professor Benattou Ziane,
Algeria's Minister of the Transition. He will

be speaking to us in French. It is is a great
pleasure to welcome Ruslan Kazakbaev, Minister

of foreign affairs to have for the Kyrgyz
Republic. Claude Turmes is Minister for Spatial

Planning in Luxembourg. Voigt voting, and
Kerstin Andreae managing director at Association

of Energy, and - Germany's biggest association
of energy companies. Let me just remind our

audience that we are very eager to hear from
you. You can use our digital tool to take

part in our audience polls, or send us your
questions and comments. I would like to start

with an audience poll, if I may. Here is our
question. How to accelerate greenhouse gas

reductions in the next decade? Set a high
carbon price on imported goods? Boost R&D

on so the ... the numbers are shifting at
the moment. I will let you keep on voting,

and we will come back to the result in just
a moment. Thank you so much, dear audience,

or faking part in that audience poll. I would
like to pick up on exactly the same question:

how we can effectively decarbonise the industrial
sector and ask all of you to talk about the

main challenges you are facing in seeking
to decarbonise industry, and how to meet efficiency

while moving in that direction. I will begin
with Minister Ziane.

Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
Good morning. Excuse me, I speak in the French

language. But because my English is very bad.
Structural changes at international level

have also been seen here in Algeria. This
situation is a great challenge for us in Algeria.

It is for this reason that we created a new
ministry, the Ministry for Renewable energy

and the energy transition, and it is the traffic
of this ministry to create an ambitious programme

and to develop an ambitious strategy for 2030.
This is about promoting efficiency and saving

energy. It is also aimed at expanding renewable
energies. We also want to promote green hydrogen.

This strategy is built on a huge potential
here in Algeria. There is a lot of sunshine

in our country. We also have the human resources
necessary. We have water resources. There

are desalination plants, which we've built
over the past few years, and this is also

important for our hydrogen strategy. Our main
goal is to gradually phase out fossil fuel

energy, which still constitutes a large part
of Algeria's energy mix. We want to create

a clean environment, a more climate-neutral
and efficient energy supply, and we also want

to create an ecosystem that proposals wealth
and prosperity for our people, and innovation.

We want to create sustainable jobs, strengthen
resilience to future crises. We also launched

lifecycle assessments, and analysed the impact
of certain lifecycles on the environment,

and we analysed possibilities of recycling
the - in the light of local specification.

Regarding the water scarcity in certain parts
of Africa, and also in light of the costs,

and the potential profits. For example, I
would like to mention a project that was implement

ed to create 15 gigawatts this year. And beyond
that, we also want to integrate the energy

sector, our focus here is, water use. Another
example is the transportation sector. We want

to promote the electrification of the transport
sector. And also to use more LNG. So there

is still fossil energy being used here, but
we can manage to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Thank you, and excuse me for not being able
to speak in English here.

If you want to elaborate later, you can talk
about the polls results. Minister Turmes,

what is the main challenge you see with decarbonising
industry given the complexity of the situation?

I think we need first a clear hierarchy on
what is really important to move fast, and

so it is about efficiency, efficiency, efficiency,
it is about renewables, renewables, renewables,

did is did direct electrification, direct
electrification, using waste heat from industry,

using heating systems which can we place gas,
for example, in a residential area, and then

comes hydrogen. So I think it is important
that with all respect to the needs to move

on green hydrogen, next year it won't be disposable,
so we need to move fast on the other issues.

How do we do this in Luxembourg? In Luxembourg,
our industry has an obligation to save every

year 1.5% of their energy, as they have to
implement obligatory audits which they have

to do, and we have an obligation on the energy
companies, so the gas and electricity companies,

they need to invest in energy efficiency 1.5%
of their total sales, so we are organising

joint ventures between the energy business
who is knowledgeable about energy, who has

long periods of pay back, with the industry.
And that is a very, very powerful instrument.

Of course, we back this up with national scheme
on investment aid, so that is run. On the

renewables, who to what is very important
is that we go now massively into renewable

long-term power purchase agreements, and in
order to help industry but also the producers

of renewables to do this match-making, there
are two things that we have kidding off. One

is at the European Investment Bank, we are
trying to get a de-Rick ing for the industry

and we want to implement what nor eight has
done, where they have a good scheme where

their export credit agency is ensuring part
of the deal which is made for example between

Norwegian wind or hydro operator and an industrial
company. That is very, very important that

we move now fast also with the de-risking
instruments so that we get fast big long-term

PPAs.
For those perhaps just embarking on this journey,

why is that important? Why is risk a bigger
issue for SMEs in this area than perhaps for

others?
I think if I'm an industrial company, of course

the last ten years I had an advantage to be
in this market, now I'm penalised to be in

this book market. If somebody is doing offshore
winds and he offers me a contract at let's

say 65, the industrialist in Luxembourg will
say, okay, I getting 65 now, but what if the

spot market is back to 30 in three years?
You have also this kind of basically hatching

possibilities or instruments which the industry
needs, and of course the offtake - of course,

if you have an offtaker with Google, because
Google will exist in five years, or ten years,

because this long-term power purchase agreements
will be eight, ten, 12 years. You cannot do

it below. But if let's say 15 small and medium
enterprises from Luxembourg show up with the

offshore wind company, then this offshore
wind company will say who are these guys?

Are they still existing in eight years? These
kinds of risk make these deals, long-term

PPAs expansive, and therefore you can have
financial instruments, and we are working

with European Investment Bank, and we are
also now working with the Luxembourgish export

credit agency style to do a Norwegian style
de-risking instrument to speed up this match-making.

The last instrument is the new instrument
which we got in December from The commissioner

from DG Competition. We are allowed for the
first time in Europe to go beyond investment

aid. We can also do operational aid. I will
describe it. We have a glass company in Luxembourg

that use fossil hydrogen which comes at a
certain cost. If I want this company to replace

this by green hydrogen, there is a differential,
and this differential is bigger. I can offer

them for free the electrolyser, but they won't
use it on site because the green will be more

operational cost. As an instrument, that is
something we used in the UK in the offshore

wind which we call "contracts for difference",
so if this glass company can now do a contract

with our Ministry of Economy, and the deal
is the following, the differential cost between

green hydrogen and fossil hydrogen is x and
then you do a contract over ten years, and

the ministry will pay for the differential.
That instrument is now cleared by DG competition.

Because it would theoretically represent an
undermining of state aid rules.

And I'm grateful to Commissioner, because,
until December, it was always strictly against

all operational aid. Now, for the first time,
and we worked a lot with DG competition to

make them understand, if we want industry
to leap-frog into a zero-carbon, we need this

operational aid, and now we have the instrument,
and so just to wrap it up, what we now do

in Luxembourg, we do a very detailed sophisticated
study with our 60, 70 biggest industrialist,

so some of the industry, where are you now,
where do you have to go? Steel industry, where

do you have to go? Glass industry? Where do
you have to go? That will be the basis then

to better understand what kind of contracts
for difference you need, or there are areas

like large industrial-scale heat pumps where
maybe you do not need even - they are in the

market, especially if you can link it with
the long-term power purchase agreement, you

do not need to make these contracts for difference.
That is what I think is the most important

instruments we need to implement now.
Thank you for the comprehensive overview.

We go now to Ruslan Kazakbaev who will be
speaking in Russian. Anybody who needs headsets,

put them on. I will give you one moment, please,
so people can get ready 

for the translation. Please, go ahead, minister.
Thank you very much, Madam Chairman.

I would like to thank the German minister.
I would like to thank Miss Baerback for the

invitation to this international conference,
and I would like to say that this conference

in the light of this situation is very important.
In the past few years, industrialised nations

have made commitments to combating climate
change and meeting global challenges, also

regarding the pandemic and international political
crises. We in Kyrgyzstan are on the path to

reducing greenhouse gas emissions. And in
our country, the 

share of emissions is tiny. I would like to
point out that supporting global commitments

in field of climate action, and climate change
mitigation, is very important to us. Kyrgyzstan

has renewed its commitment to ambitious climate
targets. Also considering the possible international

support by 2030, we aim to reduce GHG emissions
by 40% under the conditions that we receive

international support. By 2050, we want to
achieve greenhouse gas neutrality. In the

field of green technologies, we also aim to
take measures, especially in the field of

renewable energy. This is a very topical issue.
Given rising energy prices, in terms of conventional

energy, this is very important. Kyrgyzstan
has great potential for renewable energy.

Our hydroelectric power capacity is about
142 billion kilowatt hours, and also solar

energy is very prominent. The ... is in line
with the Paris Agreement to reduce greenhouse

gas emissions. In this way, we also provide
water to our neighbouring countries, that

are countries which are share rivers with
us, such as Tajikistan, and we can create

clean energy within the Project Kaza Thousand
- it is an international energy project - and

we call on others to invest together in hydroelectric
power, and in private-public partnerships.

It is a great honour for me to take part in
this discussion, to support green industry,

and to expand renewable energy. We have launched
a programme to support the green economy until

20233. We changed the tax scheme, and improved
the investment act in Kyrgyzstan to facilitate

this. To enable additional measures to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, and use renewable

energies we are taking measures to develop
electricity mobility.

Thank you, minister.
And also in the field of tourism.

Let me come to the industry representatives
on the panel, and also to talk about the main

challenges that you see, and how they can
be dealt with. Andrea Voigt, heating and cooling,

in 
both the industrial and in the overall energy

and building sectors. Dan Fonters is running
a campaign called Rethink Live to explore

the heating and cooling industry in the environment
challenges and also potential smart solutions.

So maybe you can tell us a little bit about
both sides of the equation, the challenges

and also the solutions that you're looking
at?

Thank you very much, first of all, for inviting
me to the panel. And also heating and cooling

is part of what Danfors is doing, and industrial
hydraulics and electrification like frequency

converters, for example,. Three different
pillars that enable energy efficiency across

the board, really. Heating and cooling represents
half the energy consumption in Europe and

globally, and we all know that energy consumption
unfortunately is still based to a large extent

on fossil fuels which is why heating and cooling
has a key role to play if we want to achieve

the energy and security challenges which we
are now all facing. Heating and cooling is

not only buildings, that's what you think
probably first when you hear heating and cooling,

it is also of course industry because heat
and cold is also used a lot in industry. And

what really is very important in the overall
picture is the tandem between energy and energy

efficiencies. Beep need the energy efficiencies
to get to the renewable energies, and that

is where the challenge lies, and that's where
we have a huge opportunity, I think. That

opportunity basically is relying on three
different pillars, I would say. The first

one is to optimise the energy flows, and there
are a lot of opportunities to do so that can

be very simple opportunities in a building,
for example, if you have an hydronic balancing

to make sure that the temperature is everywhere
the same at all floors and regulated and not

just factory-set. It's a simple thing, a short
payback and easy to implement. You can take

it further and say let's use the power of
digital. I haven't heard a lot about that.

We did it yesterday!
Because it brings huge opportunities. The

digital solutions bring huge opportunities
because they allow to in real time measure

energy consumption to see what goes wrong,
what goes right, where is energy needed, where

can we switch it off? There are a lot of opportunities
in that sense to reduce the energy use. If

you reduce the energy use then you more easily
switch to the renewables as well. That's the

second part I wanted to mention, so optimising
the flows, use the power of digital, and the

third one which is probably the most important
one, is is to take a systemic perspective,

mean that you don't look at silos where you
have equipment or a device, or an air conditioner,

or a heater, whatever it is, but where you
really bring it together in a district-based

approach. There you can say, okay, let's take
district energy. Let's look where is heat

available? Where do I need that heat? And
how can I bring it together. That unfortunately

today, and that comes to the challenge you
were mentioning, that unfortunately today

is not really done systematically. You would
have heat generated perhaps somewhere as a

waste heat, for example, from an industrial
process. For example, from a cooling process,

and that heat is just going away. It's not
used anywhere, but you could use that heat,

actually. Feed it into a district energy network
and use it elsewhere, then, and that then

reduces the need to generate here on the other
side. That's a big advantage we have. If you

combine this with heat pumps as Claude was
saying earlier, you can make more out of that,

you can make more flexibility, bring thermal
storage as well, and, as we move to more and

more renewables in the electricity system,
we need to we need more and more flexibility

and storage. Those energies are not stable,
they are intermittent, so whatever we can

do in order to face phase them this is a useful
contribution. What we need is to bring people

around the table and make sure that those
opportunities are being used. We need a mandatory

energy planning, for example, that brings
the different stakeholders around the table,

and that forces them to look here is heat,
here it is needed, and how can I bring it

together. I very much agree on the energy
audits, implement the energy audits recommendations,

not just give a recommendation, put it in
your drawer, and then move to the next thing.

So implement them. Make them happen. Make
them mandatory. That's another big thing which

I wanted to mention, at then a third one I
wanted to mention as well is really to valorise

the power of flexibility. If there is a way
of providing flexibility of making it easier

to phase in the renewables of providing storage,
then this should be valorised in a business

model so people are incentivised to do it,
and so are industries - that is not existing

today. So there are a lot of opportunities
there.

Thank you very much. Let me ask Kerstin Andreae
now, and you do represent the biggest energy

industrial association in Germany, and clearly
your members are facing a three-part challenge

at least: energy security in the current situation,
then energy efficiency, essentially also as

a link to reducing fossil fuel consumption,
particularly in the face of this crisis, and

then thirdly, decarbonisation. Where do you
see the biggest challenges that German industry

is facing, and where do you see the most innovative
solutions to approaching those challenges?

Thanks a lot for the invitation and discussing
here this really ... topic because the current

situation is really sad, and I think we discussed
many things currently all over world, and

we are discussing also what the challenge
to - how can we set climate change? And the

challenge to the target climate change set
on the top of our agenda, because, at the

moment we're discussing all over the world
other things, but climate change must be on

the top of the agenda. We have to do both
things. That is the point of this industrial

panel here. We have to do at first cut global
C02 emissions to zero, and, Northern Ireland,

we have to transform our whole economy in
a record time. That's the problem, we're not

only discussing the energy sector, we are
discussing the whole economy. The constraints

for this is that we have an increasing energy
demand of developing and growing population

all over the world. And this brings altogether
and these to find solutions for this is very

important, and so I'm really convinced with
discussions like this. We have a Paris Agreement,

and we have a lot of countries who are aligned
with the Paris Agreement - that's a good situation.

We know that global energy transition is based
on renewables that's also a good situation

a good a good issue and our economy and not
only the german economy a lot of economies

are highly efficient they are digital that's
really very important that we put digitalization

in these topics and we have a scientific technology
technological advances so we have a lot of

impact we can bring a lot of impact in this
questions and we need uh to bring it all together

and germany and the eu has set ambitious targets
and i think we have to consider this these

targets are not under discussion also not
in this situation and maybe um we get more

speed in the actual in in the um

to to reach these targets so we have to consider
that the energy vendor is a solution for for

our problems and as you mentioned in the beginning
we are talking about efficiency and we are

talking about energy vende but for my association
i can say we are talking also about security

of supply and security of supply is a main
is really important for the acceptance for

the energy vendor because if people don't
believe that they are secure that they that

the supply is working that their demand um
is is filled they don't accept the energy

vendor so what are the key consequences in
the uh act in the current situation first

of all um we constitutes a huge opportunity
to speed um up important decisions we have

to get people we have to get governments we
have to get companies in action second main

investments in energy industries and energy
consuming industries go all in renewable energies

in renewable invests third we have to reduce
our dependencies on fossil fuels that's not

only in the current situation i think we saw
this in the last years the dependency from

fossil fuels are too high and so we need to
reduce this and fourth life cycle assessments

of investments have taken all into account
and so for me i think what uh claude said

uh efficiency renewable energy that's all
all correct and i i'm really um convinced

that it's so important but on one point i
have another um i have another few i think

we need really a a a holistic approach and
a huge approach for hydrogen i'm sure we need

not only electrification we need green molecules
we have a huge industry we have a lot of companies

and we need green hydrogen based for their
production based their consumption and so

and my association is co-host from a ambassador's
talk we are talking about hydrogen and green

hydrogen and so many countries all over the
world are aligned with a hydrogen strategy

they have their own hydrogen strategy and
i think it's a great window of opportunity

to to force these strategies to come together
to make partnerships for hydrogen so we need

to further electrify our economies and at
the same time ramping up a hydrogen-based

economy and this is for me really very important
green electrons on the one hand green hydrogen

on the other hand may i ask one follow-up
question about that because we heard uh andrea

talking about the need for comprehensive forward-looking
energy planning and we heard minister turma's

essentially saying the same whether companies
use green hydrogen is going to depend partly

on infrastructure decisions being made right
now because of the long lead times for hydrogen

are you satisfied with the way that the german
government is and and the eu for that matter

are looking at this issue because of course
we have the risk of lock-in if infrastructure

decisions are made for example about the electricity
net about the kind of transition uh networks

that we're building as i understand it the
big industrial countries companies in germany

are going to often be producing hydrogen on
site so they are going to need distribution

networks that look different from the networks
that we have today yes i think that's really

a main question and very important question
because how can we bring the companies in

the in the right production manners how can
we bring them in the right invest investments

and they need hydrogen and they need the decision
now do we have enough hydrogen to switch in

another production line but we have not enough
green hydrogen at the moment i think we are

talking about one percent worldwide when i
see it correctly so we need on the one hand

we need to ramp up green hydrogen we need
to ramp up renewables energies because green

hydrogen is based on renewable energies but
we hope we have also a discussion around blue

hydrogen and turquoise hydrogen the problem
is blue hydrogen is based on natural gas so

we are discussing the question how long will
we explore natural gas as a basement as a

for blue hydrogen that we can help the industries
to make the right decisions for investments

in their production lines that's really a
very difficult question i think

in the end of all these discussions, we are
fine, we are all aligned that we need more

renewable energies, we need to wrap up green
hydrogen, but we need a framework around hydrogen,

not only from Germany, but from the EU, who
makes this with a big approach, with a holistic

approach, who think big, who make this industry
explorable and scaleable because it is a pillar

for our new energy system.
Thank you very much. We did do a pole panel

on hydrogen yesterday, so I'm going to endeavour
that we don't now only talk about hydrogen.

I do want to drill deeper on the tools and
technologies that all of you think would best

facilitate industrial decarbonisation going
forward. And I would like to go back to the

results of our poll if I may, so that we give
the audience a chance to see what we are seeing

here on the screen, and hopefully the audience
can get a look at that. The largest share

to boost R&D. But 27% say set a high carbon
price on imported goods. Ee you have to to

devote one panel entirely on the topic of
carbon price. It says a lot that we're not

doing that this year. Here it is, number 2
on our poll, 28% of the vote. Then we have

beyond that, 19% saying we need stricter and
more transparent ESG, accountability, 15%

want more focus on innovation in sustainable
fuels for shipping and air transport, and

5% would like to see more efforts to reduce
emissions in road transport of course. Claude

Turmes started talking about this, but I have
the sense that you wanted to respond to what

we heard.
Maybe first on why is there maybe less the

need to discuss carbon pricing this year?
Because Europe has a robust system, and Europe

has decided on I adjustment targets, so this
is not on the table. So these things are done.

We're only in Europe here!
But the European have adjustment that will

trigger a worldwide discussion. Because the
China, the US, and others are no more allowed

to import their steel, or only allowed to
import their steel with the price-tag on our

markets, that will trigger a worldwide discussion.
Maybe on green hydrogen, I think we need to

speed this up, and we need to do this big.
We need to do it in a co-ordinated way. I

want much more EU co-ordination of all this
kind of - so that is nice, but I think what

we need is European strategy, and I said to
the energy minister three years ago, when

we had a discussion, should the oil market
be in euros. I said the only one that can

be is a global hydrogen market. If Europe
is the first market to have a clear definition

on what is green hydrogen, a certification
scheme, and then we also de-risk instruments

for the green hydrogen deals, and Western
European investment banks. That's what we

have to do right now. The other thing is be
aware that, on the renewable energy directive

which is on the table, which will be finalised
in June, we have a proposal from Commission,

50% of all fossil hydrogen should be replaced
until 2030 by green hydrogen, but now the

French presidency has proposed to postpone
it until 35 which I think is a counterproductive

move because we need investment certainty,
and the best certainty is an EU law where

we say 50% of the fossil hydrogen needs to
be replaced by green hydrogen and that will

allow Algeria, for example, to immediately
know if I have a green hydrogen production

up and running in Algeria, I will have clients
in Europe who will have to relays their fossil

hydrogen by green hydrogen.
Thank you very much. I want to go across the

panel and ask you to respond to what you see
on this poll result. I'm asking for concise

responses on this. Minister Ziane, you mentioned
it, currently, the Algerian economy is highly

dependent on fossil fuels. You want to boost
your modest share. Which of these tools and

technologies are the ones that you consider
the most promising to meet that challenge

in the Algerian industrial sector?
Thank you for this question. Well, first of

all, I would like to talk about the capacity.
By 2030, we can expand this until 60%. The

programme we have launched allows us to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. And this will allow

us to save a lot of emissions. The new programme
we've launched in Algeria is also aimed to

save green house gas emissions, and we can
also export further products. And until this

strategy has been fully implemented by 2037,
we have an interim strategy which aims to

promote hydrogen. We are currently working
on this interim strategy. And I forgot to

mention that it is also important to expand
electricity mobility. The programme is another

thing I would like to mention, we want to
launch with a thousand megawatts programme,

so that we started in auctioning around here,
and the idea is to create a transition until

2035. As I said, Algeria has a lot of sunshine
at its disposal, a lot of human resources,

and also a good investment environment. And
therefore, we believe that we can embed this

hydrogen strategy as well into our context.
And we are now waiting for the concrete steps

to implement this. Algeria will also need
a further technical support, and support also

from Europe, but at the same time, we can
also support Europe.

The potential for trade in hydrogen from solar-rich
country, like yours, into Europe, with its

big industries, what do you need from Europe
really to be able to expand your hydrogen

in a reliable fashion?
So there are now only theoretical strategies

in place, but we want to place a major focus
on hydrogen. Of course, we must combine hydrogen

with solar energy, and we know that there
will be a demand for hydrogen in Europe in

the coming years in 2035, 2040. This is the
framework, time frame, that we've set ourselves

for hydrogen, and we may be possible also
to help cover energy demand, hydrogen demand

in Europe.
Let me go over to Ms Voigt, how would you

add to that or what are the priorities reflected
in the survey?

I would rather say I'm not seeing what I would
like to see on the list, actually. The discussion

that we were just having is very symptomatic.
There is a lot about hydrogen, green hydrogen,

energy supply. I mean, I'm not saying this
is not important - this is extremely important,

obviously, and we need all of the solutions
in order to achieve the climate targets and

the energy targets, that goes without saying.
There is resume for everything as well, I

think. There is no silver bullet. It's a huge
task. So that is very clear. But, I think

we also need a very strong focus on optimising
how we use energy, and that - I'm not seeing

it there. And I think it would be really a
missed opportunity if we spent all our time,

energy, money, on just discussing how can
we optimise the supply side? Let's also look

at how can we optimise the demand side? And
for the demand side, as I was saying earlier,

we have a lot of technologies and tools that
are immediately available that can be used

tomorrow, where we don't have to have a big
discussion on what needs to be done, how,

and so on, just use what we have, and use
it now. Optimise the energy flows as we can,

digitalise where we can, use the power of
the digitalisation tools that we have, go

into a district energy planning approach,
use the synergies between them, use heat pumps

to sort of make it more efficient. Lots of
stuff around, so let's make sure that we get

the balance right here.
Do you have a theory about why energy efficiency

often does get neglected in the discussion?
I was yesterday quoting the latest leader

from the Economist which says that when we
look at the energy security crisis, we are

asking too little of citizens, saves the Economist.
Why aren't we talking about turning down thermostats,

perhaps having driverless days as we did in
the 1970s? Reducing speed limits? Do you have

a theory about why that is the case and not
only on the part of citizens, but of course

on the part of industry as well?
I think it's something we've been facing,

if I refer back to the Brussels Bubble we've
been facing that for the past, I don't know

how many years! It is a complex issue, and
you can't "sell" it as easily as you can sell,

for example, a solar panel or something visible.
It is not visible as such. It is a lot of

little things that come together and that
make a difference. And, if you take active

energy efficiency, then it is really, as I
was saying, it is about regulating the energy

flow. How do you convey this in an easily
understandable way to citizens and also to

policymakers? I think that is where the challenge
lies. But I also think to be positive, it

is getting much better. I mean, it's getting
much more attention than it was getting, I

don't know, six or seven years ago, so it
is very much improving, but there is much

room for improvement still. And really, getting
the balance right is for me really the key

word here.
Thirty seconds on the issue of the Economist.

The Economist is not watching what certainly
energy ministers from all over the world decided

last week in Paris. Last week in Paris, we
decided to implement a ten-point plan on gas,

how to reduce gas in a hurry, and actively
work how to reduce the oil demand, and next

week, we have a co-ordination meeting where
we do not only have governments but will invite

C40 which is the biggest citizens to the world
who are active on climate change, where we

invite Greenpeace, and it is the only way
on the short-term to get out of the security

of supply crisis. We need a broad societal
agenda, alliance which is more than governments.

Companies, governments, and citizens must
be in. We are working on that at a co-ordinated

way level, to get this up and running. How
to save oil and gas and electricity in a hurry.

What you see here, Minister Kazakbaev, which
would be most meaningful for Kyrgyzstan as

you seek to decarbonise your industry?
Thank you. As I said, we place a major focus

on renewable energies. I said so earlier.
I said that our share of the emissions is

0.03%. This is only a tiny fraction, and Kyrgyzstan
is very much interested in exploring the possibilities

of international co-operation , for example,
regarding ecological solutions for the cities,

and energy efficiency, saving resources. 90%
of our country consists of mountains and water,

but we only use 10% of the potential of our
rivers. So we are keen to create further potential

here in the field of renewable energy, and
I have also said that solar energy and wind

energy and using the rivers require technological
innovation, and we need more innovation as

well as financial resources. And therefore,
it is our main wish to expand these areas

mainly to get together with our European partners,
and Germany. Thank you.

I ask you to take us through again these various
tools that are listed here, if we look at

those in comparison to Germany's current plan
for industrial transformation, it has ear-marked

200 billion between now and 2026, improving
R&D and even piloting on hydrogen, expansion

of the electronic vehicle charging network.
How do you think that money should be spent

to maximum positive effect and what is missing
for you on that list?

Yes, these 200 billion of Euros are important
for the industry and the investment, that

we knew where we have to go, and, as I said,
the industry is really aligned with renewable

energy, with Enengiewende, with green hydrogen,
and so, for me, this choice, I understand

that we need a boost in R&D on green hydrogen.
I fully agree that the demand side and efficiency

must be on the table. We need to discuss this
also. So you're really right when you're talking

about flexibility and how can we use flexibility
and what can we do in the industrial companies,

in the industry, to reduce the demand? But
I think we have to consider that demand grows,

and that is one of the biggest problems we
have. On the one side, we have to cut C02

emissions, we have to change the industry
in a sustainable industry, and we have a growing

demand.
Growing demand worldwide or in Europe?

Yes, a growing demand worldwide, and in Europe,
we have a growing demand on power.

But not on energy, because on energy, it's
going down in Europe.

And a demand in power. In Germany, in the
last two years, the old government says that

we have ... it means we need more renewable
energy. In Germany, we have pig problems with

permissions, we have problems with space,
we have problems with projects that are not

realised, and that is not only a German problem,
it is a problem all over the world and especially

in the European Union. We need a commitment
that the boost of renewable energy s needs

to put an action all the governments, to put
in action the companies, and also the communities,

the citizens, that we have to phase in a new
world with a new energy supply based on renewable

energies. That is for me the most important
point.

The moon shot theory.
We will do it in the renewable energy Renewable

energy Directive on the table, a new amendment
proposed by Luxembourg, Germany, and Denmark,

which says renewable energy investments will
be considered as an investment of general

interest.
And that is very, very important.

And that helps to balance also when it comes
to the he can Librium we have.

Tell us what that means, for those of us who
are not EU members. Tell us what the significance

of that is.
The EU Directive is a law which every EU country

has to apply. In that law, we will now say
that a renewable energy investment is an investment

of general interest. That gives it higher
status than other interests in society, and

that will allow us to speed up authorisations,
and the second thing we will do in that law,

and I have a bit to move also the German friends,
is we have to do it cross-border. We need

offshore wind in the North Sea. You cannot
do it in national borders. You have to do

it for the whole basin. You have to do it
for both, so that is - so it must be faster

in authorisations, and it must be more cross
border.

You were with us yesterday when we Roberto
Cingolani talked about planning and the need

for major change and Minister Annalena Baerback
said no Enengiewende can be accomplished internationally,

it's always a co-operative endeavour. Let
me go to Ms Voigt for our last word.

I totally agree with what you were saying.
As we move towards more renewables, we need

the flexibility and the storage solutions
and everything that was mentioned. I think

that is really the systems approach what I
was mentioning earlier, it's about making

sure that we bring these two together, and
that we provide the sort of tools and opportunities

in order to phase in those renewables in the
most cost-effective way. That's where the

demand side plays a role. Was where you can
provide those opportunities to bring the renewables

in a cost-evidence way into the system.
Thank you for being with us here on the panel

of decarbonising industry.


