Ladies and gentlemen, excellencies, thank you, 
Melinda. This was a marvellous job that you were  

doing over the past two days, moderating this 
event, and we are very grateful to have such a  

not only skilled but also knowledgeable 
moderator when it comes to energy issues.  

Please, let us all give a great 
round of applause for Melinda. 
 

We were here at the Federal Foreign Office and 
I think it was a great pleasure to have us all  

again meet here. And thanks to all those who 
organised it and who did all the wonderful work  

backstage that in these great rooms we could 
meet again physically. After last year,  

it was only a virtual BETD. So my second round 
of applause, please, to all those here in the  

foreign office who have organised this. Also, 
the colleagues in the Economics Ministry. 
 

We had more than 50 ministers, VIPs. We had very 
high?level speakers and participants in all of our  

sessions. And I think it was, again, clear that 
the BETD is the place to be when it comes to  

discussing the energy transition. When it comes 
to discuss what needs to be done next. And our  

not toe, from ambition to action, has really been 
mirrored in all the discussions that we had here.  

This was a very hands?on event where at least the 
discussions that I had and lots of bilaterals,  

it was always about what can we do next, what 
do we do in this year, by the end of this year,  

what are the the deliverables? This was not 
anymore about the question whether or not  

renewables are the right thing or whether or not 
green hydrogen is the route to go. But this was  

rather about how do we scale up, how do we get 
the challenges solved? There was no "if" question  

anymore, and I think that is a clear message that 
we can send from here to the rest of the world. 
 

What we will need to do now is I 
think strengthen the cooperation.  

We as Germany are the G7 presidency this year, 
and we are using this Chairmanship to accelerate.  

It is under the idea of accelerating towards 1.5 
degrees. We have put our agenda in the climate  

and energy sphere. And we are in the midst of 
this discussion on geopolitics, at the same time  

very much focusing on what it needed when it comes 
to climate. Because last week, we didn't ?? we had  

not only geopolitical news when it came to the 
war that Russia has started against the Ukraine,  

but it was also the news that in the arctic and 
in the Antarctic, we had a record 40 degrees  

increase in temperature. And that was a momentum, 
that was never there before. And scientists are  

seeing this as the absolute extreme ever measured. 
It kind of shows that the climate crisis doesn't  

care about geopolitics. It just evolves. As 
long as we burn fossil fuels. And therefore,  

it is, I think, the deployment of renewables, 
both from an energy autonomy and freedom,  

but also from the climate perspective, 
the urgent need to speed up things. 
 

And we as the presidency of the G7 this year 
are committed to push that agenda further.  

Of course this is only possible working together 
with you, with the other countries around the  

world that embark on the same journey. And 
this is especially important when it comes to  

joint energy transition partnerships that 
ail of the ministries in Germany involved  

want to push as far as possible so that we do 
what we can do at home, but we work together  

for a better world. So, ladies and gentlemen, I 
very much hope we see each other again next year.  

Virtually or physically. I think what we have 
done this time as a hybrid event is the way to  

move forward. Maybe more people here due to the 
pandemic, but it should also be possible to join  

from abroad, and I think this is a great  

vision for the BETD23. Thank 
you. 
 
            


