The Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue, dear ladies 
and gentlemen, stands not only for the discussions  

that we have here amongst ourselves, but also for 
a focus on networking with other organisations  

and also other summits that are dedicated to 
supporting the energy transition. And to that end,  

we send out our green sofa into the world, both 
literally, especially earlier, pre-pandemic,  

it was a literal object that was here on the 
stage, but we also send it out virtually in  

the sense of being a platform for exchange. And 
in this session, we are on the sofa in spirit,  

as it were, the green, at least, is reflected 
here behind us. We are using the virtual green  

sofa to bring two of our traditional partners 
into dialogue with each other. It is our  

traditional dialogue between the heads of the 
International Energy Agency, and the International  

Renewable Energy Agency, is utterly delightful 
being here as I've seen you often on screens in  

the last years. Welcome , executive director of 
the IEA, and , the director-general of IRENA.  

This is a compact time slot, dear gentlemen, so 
I'm going to ask you to keep your answers brief  

within the allotted time we had discussed in 
advance of two minutes, if you would. I know it's  

a big ask, but I'm grateful for your patience. 
Given all we've been hearing this morning about  

the links between the current geopolitical 
tensions and the energy transition, I would  

like to begin with the short-term perspective, 
often, we've done this the other way round,  

but I think today, I would really like to start 
short-term. And I would ask you to begin with we  

are witnessing very significant market volatility, 
high prices that both of the ministers underlined,  

we are also extremely uncertain about the 
future of oil and gas trade with Russia  

which is one of the world's borders, so how great 
is the risk to energy security in your view,  

and are these developments a boost or a 
potential obstacle for the energy transition? 
 

Thank you very much. First of all, you mentioned 
we are seeing each other first time since several  

months, maybe. It's the first time that I'm 
coming to Berlin after a while, and I wanted to  

make a remark here to start with  

which is unusual, it is for me. I am truly and 
deeply impressed with the new German Government,  

how quickly - in a radical way they responded to 
the Russian aggression in terms of trade, in terms  

of foreign policy, in terms of defence policy, 
in terms of energy policy. It is remarkable.  

I am somebody who follows the Germans six years, 
and the German energy policy, the foreign policy,  

Bundesliga - all of them - and I can tell you, 
I'm truly impressed. I wanted to register this  

in a clear way. It is really a chapeau to the 
new German government. Second to your question,  

we are going to see the first global energy 
crisis. It is very simple, because Russia is  

number one exporter of oil in the world, 
number one natural gas exporter of the world.  

The actions that the countries around the 
world will take against Russia, the sanctions,  

plus possible supply disruptions, mean 
energy security will be a critical  

issue in the next months if not years to come. 
And, our answer to Russia in my view should be  

bold, should be nimble, but cool-headed. 
We have to come up with policy responses,  

both on the production side to replace the Russian 
oil and gas, but also on the demand side by  

finding ways to reduce the need for 
oil and gas. On the supply side,  

finding different producers; on the demand side, 
renewable energies, energy efficiency, and we have  

for oil a big challenge through summer, because, 
in summer, oil demand goes up, the driving season.  

In terms of natural gas, especially in 
Europe, we have a big challenge next winter.  

So for oil, the challenge is this summer; 
for natural gas in Europe, next winter.  

I finish my two minutes. I stop here! 
Thank you very much. I want to pick up  

essentially on a similar question with 
IRENA with IRENA and . The soaring  

prices for fossil fuels are obviously a reminder 
that renewables have an inherent advantage for  

consumers. But do you think at least 
in the short-term that we will really  

see a major acceleration in uptake of renewables 
coming out of this current geopolitical crisis? 
 

So this is something that we have to see. 
Because the situation is still uncertainty.  

But, when we are talking about this crisis, 
because normally, it is a naturally to concentrate  

on what is happening now with the Ukrainian 
crisis, but I wish to put this in the general  

context of the fact that we have to start, we are 
supposed to start the leading from oil already  

two years ago, that we are to peak gas by 2025, 
we have to decrease emission to half by 2030. So  

I understand that there is a lot of 
... on this short period. We respond  

to this. But we have to be conscious that 
this is a moment that is the moment that  

shows once more how the centralised system, based 
on fossil fuels, was not able to provide for us a  

reliable energy system. So this is there, and we 
have no not the chance, or the luxury, to deal  

with the - we have to deal on this together. 
On this, I would like to give you an example.  

Three days ago, I was in Bangladesh, flew by 
helicopter to see a solar plant, and I asked how  

long does it take? They said eight months. Eight 
months for 35 megawatt. You can give energy for  

a big city. What is the short-term? No? So we have 
to start - we understand that the Germany has no  

change programme on nuclear to reactivate, because 
they could be ready in 2024, so they say it's  

not feasible. So not feasible. There is no room 
economically, environmentally, so when we respond  

to the short-term, we have to think already to 
the medium- to long-term, so, honestly, we have  

to have a clear discussion that is for sure, 
but we came this year with what energy outlook,  

say last year, the windows closing for the 
1.5. Today, we say if we don't act now act  

now with a speed of the scale needed, please, stop 
talking about 1.5. It will be not any more there,  

and I'm afraid that also the two degrees will be 
not there, because one thing is the commitment,  

one thing is the trends that we are observing, and 
this we have to make very clear in our report, so,  

closing it is a very of the political 
capacity to put willingness in the reality. 
 

Let me pick up on that point, in regards 
to coal, because demand for coal is rising,  

and now more so than ever of course because of 
the Ukrainian crisis. The previous Ukrainian  

channelling. Phasing out goal is challenging 
for emerging and developing countries.  

How can we make progress on this key issue? 
What we do at IEA, we look at the global  

emissions, do they get lower or higher? 
Last month, when we looked at the emissions,  

because in Glasgow we heard very strong 
statements from the countries, but  

our numbers show that in the year 2021, last year, 
global emissions, all the emissions in the world,  

reached an historic calling high. We've never 
seen such a big number increase. The main reason  

was surge of coal, coal used in electricity 
generation. My main worry, if I combine this  

with the current crisis we are in, my main worry 
is especially as a result of high energy prices,  

Asia may start new - I underline new - coal 
investment structure which could lock in  

the use of coal for decades to come. So this 
is extremely important. There is a role here  

for Europe to think what kind of policies 
Europe will take, including Germany, because  

we should not forget that the one tonne of 
emotions going from atmosphere from Jakarta  

or from Detroit, or Hamburg, or from 
Stockholm, it is the same effect on everybody.  

Emissions don't have a passport. So 
therefore coal is a major issue, and here,  

this year, the IEA is similar to what we did last 
year, the Net Zero road map for 2050, for the  

entire world, this year, we are making it how 
to bring the coal emissions to zero by 2050  

without sacrificing the economic growth in the 
energy security in the emerging countries. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me ask you, , to 
talk a little bit about hard-to-abate sectors,  

industry, transport, buildings which contribute 
a lot to global greenhouse emissions.  

Green hydrogen is often referred to 
as THE fuel of choice for industry,  

but as IRENA has pointed out, it has a long way to 
go before becoming competitive and affordable. 
 

We have to pay a priority 
attention to the end-of-use sector,  

and where hide general, as I've been saying in 
the intervention, but the minister will play  

a very important role. But, when we talk about 
the end use sectors, they're not all equal, in the  

sense that some are less harder to abate sectors. 
So, probably in buildings in these sector,  

we are already advancing, and, when we talk about 
where hydrogen could play a real difference,  

we at IRENA don't say that hydrogen is not going 
to be competitive, it's going to be competitive  

in a very short time. We have to think 
about green hydrogen, as the way we were  

talking about renewables ten years 
ago. What is lacking is not the  

green hydrogen prize as such, the fact is 
that it is not a demand that makes it possible  

to go to the scale that is needed. Also, this 
is very daunting honestly, thinking, so we have  

today, I think less than down the 
5 gigawatts of electrical capacity.  

What we see will bring us to 18 gigawatts by 
2025. But we have to give 360360 gigawatts  

by 2030 if we want to be in line with the 
electrification of green hydrogen, or hydrogen  

in these sectors. So, we have to understand the 
right policies for doing this. So we have to be  

able to naturally to work on the supply side. My 
point of view is that it could be more important  

work on the demand side, so all the industries 
that may use hydrogen, it has to be encouraged  

to be supported, to make the change. If this 
will happen, so, if the demand will be growing,  

so I think that the affirmation of agreed 
hydrogen will become at a scale soon. 
 

We will have a hydrogen panel later today, but 
permit me to get a take from most of you on  

the critical aspect of the shift not only to 
hydrogen but to other renewable clean energy  

sources, and this is THE lead topic for this 
week's economists, namely, the geopolitics  

of supply of the crucial minerals, rare earths, 
and other materials that are, in fact, needed for  

PV equipment, wind equipment, how can we, , ensure 
the supply of these commodities that are crucial  

for the energy transition, many of which are 
geographically concentrated and not necessarily  

in countries with great governance systems? 
Today, when it comes to energy security it is  

Russia and natural gas; tomorrow, it is 
lithium and other countries. If we do not  

change the current situation. I read 
the Economist as well. They've made a  

very nice chart, and everything, very clearly 
expressed the problem based on our work at IEA.  

The top three critical minerals, lithium, cobalt, 
and rare earth materials, their production  

industry, 75% of the global production 
is concentrated in three countries.  

I mean, three countries are producing 75% of 
all these three critical materials. Tomorrow,  

where are these countries? It may be a - to run 
the entire electric cars, windmills, solar panels,  

to a very few countries, it is a risk. 
So it is the reason we have to find  

ways to address this issue, ranging from other 
countries to produce those critical minerals,  

to bringing some safety nets. Last week, there was 
the meeting chaired by the US Secretary of energy,  

40 ministers around the world were in Paris, 
and they had decided to ask the IEA to build  

a safety network on the critical minerals among 
the countries to be ready for the rainy days. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me get 's take on the 
same question, including not only the geopolitics  

of renewables as such, but also the geopolitics 
of green hydrogen because IRENA puppet out  

a study on that subject which points out 
that it could go either way, stabilising or  

destabilising if certain conditions are met. 
First of all, on the ... not rare geologically.  

Fatih is right saying, for the time being, the 
production is concentrated in a few number of  

countries. But, it is possible to work on mining 
in more countries, to diversify the offer.  

So there is the first point. The second is that 
we have to work to ensure that we will work on  

the market, not like a predator, but try also 
to let the benefits of the money stay in the  

country that are producing these minerals. This 
could be supporting their country also to provide  

for a stable offer of these elements. The third 
point is that the innovation is already there,  

and we see that the dependency from these minerals 
and rare earth is decreasing day after day,  

and we think also that moving on the 
batteries, and the possibility of recycling  

the potential of a circular economy is there, 
so we don't see that we have to pay the due  

attention, but I don't see this as a barrier for 
the energy transition, and for the... renewables.  

Concerning green hydrogen, I want to be brief. 
We made clear that the green hydrogen has the  

potential to bring many actors into the market. 
This means that we can move slowly to a system  

that may look like more to a competitive system, 
so that we will, to say, diminish ... on the  

market and ensure that the more independence in 
the energy system, so, we will have an I think  

the minister, the German minister, said that 
how it is possible to go from a decentralised  

to a centralised system, bringing more democracy 
into the management of the energy system. 
 

Thank you very much. I'm getting word from 
our organisers that time is flying by,  

and that we have just a couple of minutes left 
on the clock, so let me ask both of you to speak  

very briefly to a crucial point that both of your 
organisations have emphasised in a great deal of  

analysis that you've done, namely, how we unlock 
adequate resources, adequate financial flows for  

a truly inclusive energy transition that is also 
at the speed that we need. Your key messages? 
 

So first of all, I would like - two things, maybe, 
first, we are seeing every day in television,  

in the social media, a humanitarian crisis 
in Ukraine. This is incredible. This is not  

a Russia-Ukraine crisis, this is Russia's 
invasion of Ukraine. I want to put the name  

of it - this is number one. This humanitarian 
crisis is causing an energy crisis, we all know,  

and we should not forget the third crisis which 
is the climate crisis. So as a result of that,  

what I am saying is the governments that are 
taking now measures in order to address this  

energy crisis, should not create additional 
barriers to reach our climate course. And here,  

when it comes to resources, financing investments, 
I think we should pay special attention to how we  

are going to mobilise investments, clean energy 
investment, renewable efficiency, electric cars,  

in the emerging worlds, where the bulk of 
the emissions will come from. Thank you. 
 

Thank you very much. That certainly 
underlines the message we heard in our last  

panel. , same question to you you said 
we should not be distinguishing between  

short-term and longer term, we need to be moving 
now, so your key message on financial resources? 
 

I think you will start to love me, in the sense 
that to say, read this. This is the answer  

of IRENA to link the short-term to 
the medium and long-term response. 
 

Thank you. 
There you go,  

ladies and gentlemen! Do we find this online? 
It is great to see that thing known as paper,  

but I suspect ... 
Online. 
 

IRENA's website tells you everything that you 
need to know about the answer to that question.  

To both of you, many, many warm thanks 
for being with us during this interesting,  

far-reaching dialogue. I wish 
we had had more time, but you've  

managed to compress a lot of messages into a 
short space of dialogue. Thank you so much.


