And for our next to last Studio Session, 
I am joined now by Stefan Kapferer,  

he is the CEO of 50Hertz. Welcome. 
Thank you for having me, Jennifer. 
 

In the Europassal, I had a panel on coastal 
energy. I think you're here to talk about  

coastal energy. Could that be right? 
Yeah, 50Hertz are responsible for connecting  

the wind farms in the Baltic Sea. That's 
our responsibility. We all know there are  

a lot of opportunities at the moment. So 
coastal energy is a great topic for us. 
 

So tell me a little bit, what's the potential 
there for energy generation in the North Sea  

and the Baltic Sea and what plans does 
50Hertz have to unlock that potential? 
 

Yeah, when Europe announced there is a potential 
in the North and the Baltic Seas, the European  

seas as a whole, of 100 gigawatt. So obviously 
if we want to take more renewable energies in  

our grid infrastructure, in the European Union, we 
have to untap this potential. In the Baltic Sea,  

there are some estimations about 90 gigawatt 
of offshore energy only in the Baltic Sea.
 

What is interesting is Denmark, for example, is 
very strong on renewable energy. The Baltic states  

have a lot of potential. Sweden has a lot of 
potential for renewable energies offshore. On  

the other side, we have Poland and Germany, 
two Member States of the European Union,  

which are short on renewable energy. Though 
to combine these potentials and demand side  

and supply side of offshore wind in the Baltic 
Sea is a great opportunity for also countries. 
 

We just had Denmark and our panel here talking 
about the supply they have the and the idea  

of the importance of figuring out supply 
and demand questions. I want to ask you,  

what kind of role does offshore wind power play 
when it comes to protecting our climate targets. 
 

Closest to base load compared to other renewable 
energies. That's different to solar. That's also  

different to onshore wind where the generation 
capacity is much lower. So every additional wind  

farm in the North Sea, in the Baltic Sea is 
helpful to realize the climate targets of the  

European Union. And one more reason why it is 
so relevant, obviously it is normally a kind of  

interconnection, yeah. We realized one and a half 
years ago with the colleagues from ?? on the other  

hand it is integrating wind farms in the Danish 
part of the sea and also the German part. So  

it's a mix of generation and interconnecter. And 
obviously in a world which is based on renewable  

energy, on volatile renewable energy, it's helpful 
if the market is larger than only a national one.  

And that's the reason why these meshed grid 
situations, we will develop in the Baltic Sea  

between the differing neighbouring countries. 
We'll see the same in the North Sea I'm sure.  

It's extremely relevant reaching the 
climate targets of the European Union. 
 

You just talked about cooperations in between 
countries, but can you name me one or two  

important actions that we need to unlock costly 
energy and speed up this global Energiewende? 
 

First of all, we will see larger wind farms 
with higher generation capacity. So for the  

German North Sea, we expect now that we 
will see 2 gigawatt power lines. It's also  

a technology question. How to use this 
energy in the onshore grid. We will also see  

industrial capacities moving to the coastline in 
Europe because there are a lot of green energy  

is available for them to be used by industrial 
sites, which will become more and more relevant  

for all of these energy?intensive industries. 
Nevertheless, we will also need renewable  

energies from the seas in Austria, in the Czech 
Republic, in other countries which are not  

linked to coastlines in Europe. So the grid 
infrastructure onshore is also relevant  

to transport these electricity to all Member 
States of the European Union. And last comment.  

There are some areas in industry, especially, 
where we need a lot of green hydrogen. And to  

produce green hydrogen, we will also need 
additional capacities of renewable energy.  

So more offshore wind means also more production 
side, more electrolyzers for green hydrogen. 
 

It sound like international cooperation is one 
of the most important aspects that we can bring.  

That is why we are here at the BETD this year, as 
every year, to make those collaborations happen.  

Thank you so much to Stefan Kapferer, the CEO 
of 50Hertz, for joining me today for this lovely  

conversation. Thank you so much. 
Thank you, Jennifer.


