I am joined now by Joachim Goldbeck, 
the CEO of Goldbeck Solar. Now,  

as a pioneer in the solar industry, Joachim 
Goldbeck founded Goldbeck Solar and developed  

the company into the market leader for the 
PV industry, offer EPC and O & M services  

to utility?scale PV power plants on a global 
level. He was re?elected to serve as President  

of the German Solar Association for a fourth 
term in 2020. Since April 2019, he has been a  

member of the Sustainable Finance Council of the 
German government. Please join me in welcoming  

Joachim Goldbeck. Hello, Mr. Goldbeck. 
Thank you so much for being here today. 
 

Thank you, Jennifer, for the 
invitation. It's A great 
 

You actively invest in innovations for the solar 
market. What drives you as an entrepreneur? 
 

When I started solar ?? my own company 
within the solar branch 20 years ago,  

I really wanted to get rid of fossil fuels and 
replace it by renewables, by solar energy. And  

I think now it becomes more and more obvious. 
The climate crisis is becoming visible  

on the one hand. The energy prices are soaring. 
Except for renewables, which are low. And now the  

idea is becoming more and more important 
so that nobody can take you hostage  

on the energy side. So I think all those three 
elements of a sustainable energy world are pushing  

towards solar, pushing towards our business 
model. And we provide turnkey Solar solutions 
 

Can you tell me a little bit about 
what those solutions look like? 
 

We look at a solar project. The whole value 
chain. From first starting project development,  

financing, and we build the 
solar plant, as so?called EPC.  

Later on we do the O & M, once it's built. We 
do the asset management and then sell the energy  

on the market. So the whole value chain. 
So it sounds like a real sort of holistic  

chain as well. Do you also pay attention 
to what's going on outside of the system? 
 

On various levels. I mean, a solar power plant 
is not purely producing energy, but it has to  

be fit into a system, an electricity system. 
It has to fit ?? feed into the grid. It has to  

feed to a company which is using it. So we need 
to look at demand?side management. We need to  

look at stabilising the grid. Using batteries, 
et cetera. And that's the technical side. 
 

Also, if you are talking about ground?mounted 
systems, we have the issue of biodiversity on  

our sides of the combination of solar and agri?PV 
or agricultural use, that's another focus. 
 

Do you have any other focuses 
or are your solutions just for  

solar customers? How does that look? 
 

Again, it's not only the solar customer, it's the 
grid and it's the public domain as well. As we  

are embedded as a solar company into a political 
system. So as President of the Solar, we are also  

consulting as well as with the German government 
and governments abroad so that renewable energy,  

especially solar, can be deployed anywhere 
in the world and has the best chances. 
 

It does have the best chances. It's fantastic that 
the German solar industry is here with us at the  

2022 BETD. I'd like to thank my guest, Joachim 
Goldbeck, CEO of Goldbeck Solar, for joining us  

today. Thank you very much. 
Thank you, Jennifer. 


