Urban population is set to increase to 5.2
billion.

Today, cities already account for 40% of final
energy consumption.

And up to 70% of greenhouse gas emissions.

Reducing energy consumption and switching
to renewable energy and heat often goes hand

in hand with a gain in quality of life for
residents.

Through cleaner air, less noise, less sealed
land, and more green areas.

And welcome back, everyone.

And that is, indeed, our topic.

How can municipalities transform energy and
transport systems while simultaneously enhancing

the quality of urban life?

Because it's all about livable cities.

How are digital applications transforming
urban mobility and other systems?

How can emerging and developing economies
foster adoption of new tools and technologies

to ensure a broad?based transformation to
sustainable living?

Those are our key questions, and now it is
my great pleasure to introduce our eminent

speakers.

As always, I'm going to keep the introductions
short top maxemise our time for discussion,

and would be very grateful if you will also
keep your responses concise.

Thank you.

And I begin here to my left with Cuba's Minister
of Energy and Mines, Nicolas Livan Arronte

Cruz.

A great pleasure to have you with us.

Welcome.

And it is also a pleasure to welcome Alamine
Ousmane Mey, Minister of Economy, Planning

and Regional Development for Cameroon.

And also with us, Cheikh Niane, Permanent
Secretary of Energy at the Ministry of Petroleum

and Energy in Senegal.

Also with us, Rana Adib.

Great to see you again.

Executive Director of the Renewable Policy
Network.

A multi?stakeholder network on renewable energy
based at the United Nations' Environment Programme.

And with us also is Rohit Sen. He is Head
of Sustainable Energy, the network Of Local

Governments For Sustainability.

He's wording and managing all activities and
projects related to the sustainable energy

transition.

And finally, I'm very pleased to welcome Cecelia
Andersson, who is Lead for Urban Mobility

and Urban Basic Services at UN?habitat.

Previously worked at the urban division of
the Swedish International Development Cooperation

agency.

Great to have you with us.

Thank you so much for joining us remotely.

And before we begin, dear audience, I'd like
to get a quick take from you on the following

question.

In the coming decades, what percentage of
urban expansion will be in the developing

world?

So please answer that.

We have three choices that you can choose
between.

And don't go googling this, please.

Try to answer it from the top of your head.

65%, 80%, or 90%, and we'll come back shortly
to look at whether you got it right.

So now let me go to all of the panel with
an opening question that essentially is the

same to all of you.

And it's to draw on your own experience, if
you would, please.

To share examples of best practises.

What approaches and measures are you seeing
being adopted by innovative cities and either

in your own country or, of course, in the
countries that you work with.

Adopting these solutions to achieve the dual
goals both of sustainable energy consumption,

but also enhancing quality of life.

Because those two things really need to go
together in order to generate public acceptance.

And I'll start right here with Minister Cruz.

Sorry, I'm hoping that we will get translation.

One moment.

Do we have translation?

Okay.

Oh, you weren't using your microphone.

I'm sorry, that's the problem.

Good afternoon.

For Cuba, this is a major honour to be here
at this Energy Transition Dialogue.

One of the priorities in my country is to
try and provide the entire population with

clean and secure energy in accordance with
the 7 SDG.

Even though our greenhouse emissions are not
significant when comparing them to the global

scale, nevertheless, Cuba has undertaken to
observe the results of the Paris Climate Agreement.

And we will support the transition to renewable
energy.

So our main objective is to achieve 100% of
renewable energy for our country, especially

solar and wind energy, and that will enable
us to gain technological independence, and

we will support sustainable development.

We believe that, first and foremost, we must
make sure that the cities will accept this

responsibility and use energy as efficiently
as possible to achieve sustainability and

better quality of life of our citizens.

Now, specifically, this means it is possible
to make sure that energy is ?? that these

energy measures are supported by governments,
and that is an incentive ?? we need to provide

incentives for everyone to contribute towards
making optimum use of waste, for example.

To use photovoltaics, wind energy, and achieve
optimal energy efficiently when it comes to

lighting cities.

And, of course, we need campaigns to make
sure that sustainable energy is used in a

clean way.

All these objectives will ensure better quality
of life for the population, and at the same

time this is necessary to preserve biodiversity
and the environment in general.

Thank you very much.

Let me go on now to Minister Mey, please.

Same question to you.

What your experience is, what you see as really
key tools and technologies to make cities

both livable and more sustainable.

Well, I thank you, Melinda, for giving me
the floor.

I will start with words of gratitude to the
organizers of this event, the German government.

We are very pleased to be here and talk about
an important topic.

The dialogue about transition, energy transition.

We were very inspired by the different keynote
addresses and presentations.

And I want to touch on your question, because
this is going to be one of the major challenges

on the continent in Africa, particularly because
of the development of the population.

The urbanisation.

And the consumption of energy as well as the
emission of green gas, CO2.

Why is it critical?

It is a nation, 5 billion people living in
cities.

On the continent, we'll be having 2.3 billion
people and probably 80% will be moving to

a city.

And their consumption of energy and the emission
of green gas is going to be an important issue

to deal with.

I want to mention to you four points which
are going to be critical in solving this problem.

First is awareness, information, education.

Awareness, information, education.

Because these are concerns we are talking
about.

And not sometimes very well?understood at
the grassroots level.

And this, therefore, is important to inform,
to educate, and to create more awareness.

The second point is about efficiency before
coming to how to deal with this situation.

Right now we are already consuming.

We are already wasting.

So we should improve on that before we get
into reducing the way we are consuming energy

in the long run.

Of course, we have to change our way of thinking
and functioning.

A private ownership should be looked at differently.

The community approach should be probably
the road, the path to go.

Otherwise we will have cities which are probably
very densely populated.

But the quality of life and the consumption
of energy is not going to be the right thing

we are doing there.

Consequently, we'll be producing more green
gas.

The last thing I want to mention, which is
one of the areas we are talking.

It's vast rapid transit.

Cities are going to have a lot of people.

One of the big concerns is how are they moving?

Are they moving easily?

Are they moving with respect to the environment,
are they creating more pollution?

Vast rapid transit is what we're dealing with
in Cameroon with support of the World Bank.

We hope these new technologies, better anticipation
and urban planning will lead to better cities

where we both have quality of life as well
as efficient consumption of energy, as well

as also the renewable energy we need in terms
of supply.

Cameroon is a blessed country.

We have more than 80% hydroelectricity.

We are promoting solar energy.

And we do believe that for the future cities
should be in the line of our policies towards

sustainable, efficient, and green energy consumption.

I thank you.

Thank you very much.

And we'll maybe come back to a couple of those
points a little bit later on.

Let me go now to Permanent Secretary Niane.

Thank you very much.

First of all, I would like to thank you for
this invitation.

We are very grateful to be here with all the
Senegali designation here.

What I wanted to say regarding this point,
the minister from Cameroon already said the

challenged mentioned for Africa.

But here especially in Senegal where I'm from,
we are facing also to this challenge.

But ten years ago, our government created
a national agency only in charge of energy

efficiency and energy management.

And so after the creation of this agency,
the government wanted to tackle the challenge

of the regulatory framework.

And then we put a law in order to promote
and even to forbid the importation of some

of the products that can affect our energy
efficiency.

For example, the lightings, you know, these
old lightings and so on.

And all of this is within a global strategy
in the country which is what we call plan

Senegal emerging countries.

And in this plan, energy, of course, is a
big challenge.

Because in our country, we are also challenging
?? facing the challenge of access of electricity

to everybody.

But at the same time, we need to educate and
communicate, to make people to understand

that we can be a developed country even by
respecting the environment and also having

a good policy in terms of energy efficiency.

Because this is a challenge.

How people will have a way of life that will
be very, you know, to satisfy them in their

evolution, but at the same time, facing to
the energy challenges.

And we also have another agency only in charge
of renewable energy.

In Senegal, currently we have around 30% of
our national grid only from renewable, solar,

wind and hydro mainly.

And we are Rale trying to put policies and
also to think again how we are going to contract

our building and so on.

How we are going to manage mobility.

And also what are the main challenges in terms
of digital and so on.

So I think during the discussion we'll go
further in explaining what we are doing.

Thank you.

Let me just ask you one follow?up, if I may.

Because at so many panels at this year's BETD,
we heard people saying we need to focus more

on energy efficiency.

Energy efficiency is so important, but it's
often the neglected component.

So just say one or two words, if you would,
about the actual concrete changes you have

seen in energy consumption, in energy behaviour
and energy savings since you put into place

your ministry.

Because that's fascinating to have a ministry
dedicated to that.

Absolutely.

I can give an example.

For the lighting in Senegal, we have the biggest
project in the world in terms of solar lighting.

We import more than 100,000 solar lights in
Senegal that we put in all over the country.

And this was the first phase.

And we are going to do the second phase.

And when we are going even in the factories,
you know, to visit these things, they told

us there is no project like that in the world.

This is a concrete action that we did just
to promote and to remove all these old lighting,

lighting that pollute the environment, also
that consume many energy.

And with this, we have a big economy in terms
of energy.

On the another hand, we are all for all of
our buildings, administrative buildings ?? so

we are putting also efficient and solar panels
to be ?? to enable these buildings in the

city, the administrative buildings to all
move into solar in an efficient way.

And what I was mentioning also was the regulatory
framework.

If you don't have a proper regulatory framework,
you cannot move forward in this energy efficiency

management.

So this is also a very important point.

And in Senegal, I think that we understood
this one maybe ten years ago, and the government

put in place all the regulatory in order to
move forward and to go further.

Now we are also working with the different
cities to move forward and to communicate

and to educate, like I was mentioning, people
to understand the needs in implementing such

projects.

Thank you very much.

And we'll dig a little bit deeper on the question
of regulation and policy a little bit later.

Let me go now to Rana Adib to hear your thoughts
on our first question.

Thank you very much.

First off, on the question, I think that ministerial
governments have a key role to play in the

energy transition.

And that's something we see actually global.

A million people ?? sorry, a billion people
are living in cities that have a renewable

energy target and engaged in the transition.

And I think this is really building on the
part that governments also have a regulatory

authority.

And what is important about this, it means,
like, 25% of the urban population lives in

cities that are engaged here.

What I think we ?? what we observed, basically,
is that cities are very important to drive

basically the transition.

Not only from the energy supply side but from
the demand side.

And this is fundamental when we are looking
into the sectors of heating and cooling.

So in the building industry sector.

And of transportation.

Now, how do they approach?

And I think they have a very integrated approach
here.

Which is important.

So on efficiency and renewables, for instance,
it's very clear that when we are moving ?? I

take the example of the building sector.

It's 50% of the demand we are ?? of the energy
consumed is in heating and cooling.

And half of it is in the building sector.

Local governments can basically have Net Zero
standards, building standards, and sometimes

we really observe that these are technology
neutral.

So it can be by energy efficiency measures.

It can be by energy?saving measures.

It can be by measures on materials being used,
and obviously also by the renewable energy

supply.

And I think this is really something where
we see that municipal governments are often

more advanced than national governments because
they have the possibility to act here in a

certain sector.

In the transport sector, we observe also that
there is a big push for developing public

transportation.

Which is walking and cycling.

Obviously, this has been developed very much
by many cities also in the COVID times.

Where there was raising awareness also about
the importance of air quality and the W.H.O.

standards have been a driven for municipal
governments to engage here.

When we're looking into the transport part,
we see the trend is electrification.

Electrification means it is more energy efficient.

What is often not happening yet is there is
a direct link to also provide the electricity

with renewable power.

Now, what can governments do here?

And we see that municipal governments are
doing this.

Is using their regulatory frameworks to impose
it.

Engaging in their procurement strategies,
they can clearly decide what they procure,

which technology, what they put in place.

But also inspiring city players to engage
in the transition.

When we're looking into commercial fleets,
we see the diesel bans that have been installed

in cities.

And I guess, like, if you ask, what is the
innovation?

I think there is a lot of policy innovation
actually happening at the city level, which

really allows to not only look at the power
sector.

We are speaking a lot about the power sector
at the national government side, from the

energy supply side, but really in the main
energy consuming sectors where unfortunately,

I guess,, like, the transition is lacking
behind.

Just two numbers to finish.

In heating and cooling, renewable energy share
is only 10%.

In transport, 3.4%.

This shows that basically we need the municipal
governments to bring this to 100%.

Thank you very, very much.

Let me now go on to Rohit Sen to hear what
you are seeing amongst the cities in your

vast network and what tools and technologies
you think they're using that are of particular

interest.

Thank you, first of all, for having me here.

I think the fellow panellists already touched
upon many points which are important.

But let's take a step back and see where we
are.

I mean, we already know the amount of energy
we consume in cities.

A lot is wasted.

Whether it's heat energy or electricity.

We know that millions of people are still
not having access to even basic forms of electricity.

Two sides of the coin.

And then CO2 emissions are record high.

Yet, we are looking at urbanisations going
to happen in the next decades, more than 80%

to 90%.

So how are the cities, the local governments
going to take up this challenge?

I think to look at this is adding to the supply
side, so renewables is definitely in for generation.

Looking at energy efficiency.

I will add one more, energy conservation,
because that's important to even see the demand

that you have can be handled in a proper way.

We see the development happening in the West
or in Europe and the U.S. Can the same model

be applied in the cities coming up in Africa,
in Asia, and so on?

Perhaps not.

The fabric needs to change based on renewables
transitioning from fossil fuels, looking at

how various vectors like energy storage, green
hydrogen, if I may, can be utilised in this.

And across the sectors, whether it is transport,
agriculture, and buildings, so on.

Local governments have a lot of authority
which they can use.

Yes, there are issues where they need to work
with the national governments and national

governments ministries need to give them the
authority to play along and do the work that

they need to do.

They are closer to the citizens in the city.

They understand the fabric and the need of
the citizens and can deliver with active participation

from various stakeholders from the cities
and regions.

Some of the key points that I think they can
think and use working at urbanisation, developing

new cities which are more planned and more
let's say climate neutral in a way.

Let me ask you a naive question.

Different between energy conservation and
energy efficiency.

How would you describe that for a layperson?

I would say energy efficiency more in the
machines.

Instead of using a tungsten bulb you're using
an LED.

It can be adjusted.

Not often you'll see big cities might have
the same amount of resources to meet the demand.

So, therefore, I would put three together.

Thank you very much.

Let me go now to Cecelia Andersson waiting
patiently there on screen.

Your thoughts, please, on the same question.

Thank you so much, Melinda.

Such a pleasure to be part of this panel.

As you were mentioning, we're seeing cities
taking roles as ambassadors to promoting energy

consumption and take a more planning perspective
to our cities and how planning can sort of

reduce the unnecessary travel and how we can
build more cities that are more energy efficient.

And in this regard, I just want to highlight
a few aspects of that.

One is about developing neighbourhoods that
promote walking and cycling.

Where opportunities and services are within
a short walking distance of where people walk

and live.

And many of you are probably familiar with
the concept of the 15?minute city.

Which, for example, the mayor of Paris is
adopting.

But then you might have also heard about the
one?minute city that Stockholm is aspiring

to.

It's also about prioritising non?motorised
transport, which was mentioned earlier as

well, by creating adequate space for streets.

So it's about an efficient street network
that allows for better connectivity.

So we're talking about small blocks and more
intersections.

Which will allow for better movement within
the city.

We also need to particular for mixed land
use where residential, economic and commercial

activities can take place in the same neighbourhood.

Reducing the need to travel long distances.

And it's also about locating development near
public transport nodes.

Public transportation really offers the best
mobility solutions to saving energy and moving

people quickly and efficiently across the
city.

So it's really about that compact city, supported
by short transit commutes.

And with these principles, I think you can
form an energy efficient city which is more

integrated and brings people, activities,
and the built environment together, creating

a better quality of life for all and ensuring
particularly that we don't leave anyone behind.

Thank you.

Not leaving anyone behind is a topic that
I want to come back to a little bit later

on, but thank you so much for those thoughts.

Let me now drill deeper on some of the things
that you have mentioned and also some of the

things that your particular cities are facing.

And I'll begin again, if I may, with Minister
Arronte Cruz.

We heard Germany's Environment Minister speaking
just before this panel, talking about Germany's

immediate action plan for adaptability for
municipalities.

Well, Cuba, of course, is facing the climate
crisis right now and facing water scarcity,

drought, more frequent storms and more resilience,
of course, is a key component of livable.

So a question to you about how you are meeting
these challenges and also the repercussions

for energy systems, especially in Havana,
of course, Cuba's biggest city.

Yes, as I just mentioned, within our government,
we have a priority, which is implementing

solar and PV energy sources.

Renewable energy sources within the energy
matrix.

We must underline one thing.

Our policymaking or our policy is undergoing
a change, a transition.

We want to reach a 100% energy matrix that
is renewable.

When we talk about municipalities and cities
and as well, of course, about our capital,

well, we focus a lot and have focused a lot
on PV panels installed on residential areas.

And we have implemented policies which are
supposed to improve water pumping systems

based on solar energy.

We have also adopted policies aiming at focusing
more strongly on water supplies that are solar

powered.

Which is a lot more efficient.

We place priority on housing and building
where there is no capacity to build PV plants

or panels on the roof.

But in these areas, we still want to address
other energy sectors.

And we take energy from other sources, solar
energy, as the final consumer.

So we have a more clean city and can reap
the advantages of solar energy.

We are also promoting a new policy to support
immobility.

We are adapting the city in such a way that
is a small apt for this transition towards

more and more mobility in our city.

And in our cities in general.

It is mainly about public transport and urban
transport, but we are also addressing the

entire service sector.

We also have an energy efficiency campaign.

Which aims at more efficient lighting.

We are using LED lights in buildings.

And in public buildings, we want to achieve
more efficiency.

We want to achieve a better life quality for
our people while also reducing emissions,

of course, in big cities.

Thank you very much.

Minister Mey, Cameroon has been working with
UN?Habitat, represented here by Cecelia Andersson,

to support government entities in areas like
urban?rural linkages.

A key topic that I hear again and again on
panels about sustainable cities, but also

on climate resilience, on upgrading of poor
urban districts, and more.

Can you tell us a little bit more about this
and also how that work is influencing energy

consumption?

Once more, I want to say that the issue of
climate change as well as development of cities

with respect to all these challenges is a
concern, both at the central level as well

as at the local governmental level.

The two have to work hand in hand to address
this important issue.

More importantly, the local government is
the key driver.

The government of Cameroon has been working
with an institution like the United Nations

Habitat, as well as the World Bank to promote
new plan, new programme.

For instance, inclusive resilience and green
city.

As well as developing rural areas to make
life suitable, affordable, livelihood possible

in rural areas instead of just moving to urban
areas.

This has to do with the planning of these
rural areas in anticipation.

Because as we say, prevention is better than
cure.

So local municipal authorities have that development
plan.

The central government comes and supports
and brings in institutions like United Nations

Habitat and other institutions to put in place
these kinds of projects and attract the necessary

funding.

Let us not forget the fact that these opportunities,
in terms of technology, in terms of new materials,

low?cost and more efficient materials, have
to be also acquired by these local authorities

and governments.

Which is necessary and requires some funding.

We are proud to see that these models have
been launched in Cameroon, and we see that

there is a reduction of movement between rural
areas and urban cities.

We want to believe that taking into consideration
experiences in different other places of the

world, we should increase on efficiencies
in the areas where it is already being consumed,

as mentioned by some of the panellists already.

But project ourself in such a way that development
should take place not in the centralised manner

but in a decentralised manner.

And development in a decentralised manner
is about production, transport, supply, and

efficient use of energy, wherever you are.

And I will end up by saying, all these new
developments, taking advantage of new technology,

taking advantage of digital leapfrogging,
we want to think that it is only true quick,

better education and planning, right planning
that will be able to implement.

Otherwise, we will be forced to destroy what
has been done in cities that are being constructed.

Not in an orderly manner, but in a distorted
manner which is not the one we are looking

for.

So this is I believe the experience we are
going through.

It's a challenging one.

I'm pretty sure we have to learn from many
parts of the world.

But it is the direction to go if you want
a better life in both rural as well as urban

areas in our countries.

And I think I'll jump over to Cecelia Andersson,
if I may, given the fact that Habitat is the

partner in that particular work that Minister
Mey was just talking about.

You're an expert in the field of mobility.

And I wonder how you see the mobility aspect
of that urban?rural linkage that Minister

Mey was mentioning.

And perhaps you can also just speak a little
bit about what was to happen to make public

transport a bigger part of the solution to
sustainability and livability in cities, including

also obviously transport systems that make
use of renewables.

No, thanks a lot, Melinda.

And, yeah, just like you were saying as well,
I think when it comes to mobility, we're looking

at figures that show that nearly 30% of energy
consumption is due to the movement of goods

and people.

And this is also linking them, urban areas
with rural areas as well, where you have the

transfer of goods and people between cities
and villages.

And of course a lot of that is actually then
involving transportation, highway ?? highway

traffic.

So this actually tells us that, you know,
the measures that we need to take to have

the greatest impact on reducing energy consumption
should actually target then highway transportation

and single?use vehicle.

And this requires a shift in how we plan and
how ?? the decisions that policymakers are

taking.

To focus more on zero and low?carbon mobility,
by promoting sort of public transport as a

way of actually reducing energy consumption,
emissions, and air pollution.

And I think many of you might also be aware
of the avoid, shift, and prove approach, which

I think many cities are actually adopting
as well.

Which is if we can avoid or reduce the need
to travel through sort of integrated land

use planning and reducing those trip lengths,
it is a way of actually being able to ensure

that we have reduced our energy consumption
in that way.

And, of course, local authorities have a key
role to play in that.

And also linking then with the interland.

And it's about also, you know, shift.

How can we seek to improve the trip efficiency
and move towards more low?energy consumption

and environmentally?friendly transportation
modes?

Such as public transport.

And local authorities can shift the modal
share of its transport system by providing

that infrastructure, but also the incentives
for people to choose public transport and

active mobility, rather than private cars.

Say a word about incentives, if you would,
please, because I see our time is rapidly

dwindling, and I wanted to get to that later.

So I'm just gonna jump ahead.

Say a word about incentives, please.

About incentives, I think it's really important
that we actually incentivize people to actually

choose public transport as a way of the most
chosen mode of trying to ?? of moving around

in the city.

So incentives like, for example, we've seen
subsidised public transport tick tickets that

you can actually subsidise that.

Whether it's, like, an annual ticket that
has been bought.

You can also disincentivize, which I think
is really important as well, about increasing

parking fees or reducing parking spaces in
cities so it becomes more difficult to actually

use a car.

But I think it's also about providing affordable
and easy access to energy efficient modes

of transport and mobility.

So it's about supporting on the neighbourhood
level, for example, electric charging facilities

or bike?share schemes.

Making those more available and linking that
then with public transport.

And sometimes it's not about very heavy investments
in, for example, light rail or metro systems.

It can be investment into a bus rapid transit
system.

Which is much cheaper and is a way of actually
then being able to support then a larger number

of people to be able to move around the city
more efficiently.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Let me go now to Permanent Secretary Niane,
if I may.

By the way, I was very pleased to hear you
talking about bus rapid transport earlier

on, because, in fact, it used to be always
that was a province of Latin American cities.

It was the Latin American cities on the panel
who could talk about that.

It's great to have Senegal talking about it.

So just talk to us a little bit about Dakar.

Because Dakar has 25% of Senegal's population,
I believe.

I wonder what you are doing ?? or what you
are seeing in Dakar itself that really is

taking that city toward greater sustainability
and resilience.

Absolutely.

Thank you very much for this question.

Because as she was mentioning, in Dakar, we
have around 4 million people living in Dakar,

which is only 550 kilometres, square.

So the main challenge will be, of course,
a part of the consumption that I mentioned

earlier.

It will be to have a sustainable mobility
strategy.

In that perspective, we have this rapid bus
transit, which is a very big and very important

project for the government that will be in
place end of this year.

You know, next year.

And this will enable to have around 300,000
people per day transportation.

Because we need to know that in Dakar, we
have 80% of the transportation by road.

And the government understood that we need
to create a new kind of sustainable urban

mobility.

And we implement this express trend which
is the very big project that we just put in

place.

And that is in service since last year.

And this at least enabled to have 200,000
people that now are taking this train and

avoiding cars.

On the other hand, you have this rapid bus
transit.

So all of this is a strategy that the government
put into place to have a sustainable urban

mobility, to avoid emissions and also for
energy economy and in the other hand, government

have also for public administrations and hospitals
and old administrative buildings, you know,

inefficiency and very ambitious programme
for that to reduce these emissions.

That's why I will also take this opportunity
to tell to the private sector, to the German

private sector, if they really want to invest
in energy efficiency and renewables, we have

different projects and many projects in terms
of energy efficiency in Senegal that we are

looking forward to having a great cooperation
on that.

I see Rana Adib nodding emphatically as you
speak.

And I wanted to ask you, Rana, to talk a little
bit more about renewables?based energy as

a stepping stone towards Net Zero for cities.

And what actions you think need to be taken
not only to bring that along, but also to

mitigate adverse impacts for populations during
this transition period.

Because we're looking at basically ?? it was
said again and again yesterday in our opening

session.

We're looking at a real paradigm shift, a
revolution in the way our cities are going

to be organised.

Yeah, thank you very much for this question.

I think it's actually it's coming down to
a very strong integration of many aspects

we've heard here.

I think we had the planning part, which is
fundamental.

Infrastructure part.

Policies.

And then a topic we have not spoken about
is I guess, like, two topics.

It's investments.

Because the infrastructure needs massive investments.

And that's often something city governments
can actually not do on their own.

So they need to collaborate with the national
governments, with international partners,

and also with the private sector.

And I think also when we are looking into
some cities that are really driving this forward,

there is a strong collaboration with those
players and a strong multi?level governance,

I guess.

Another aspect, we spoke about the citizens.

And I think especially in the current geopolitical
situation, the reality is we have a fundamental

structural shift that needs to happen for
a diversity of regions.

This needs to be supported by citizens.

And the municipal governments are closer to
their citizens.

Now, what can they do here?

And I think this is where basically the decentralised
nature of renewable energy really allows to

involve citizens to directly engage and benefit
from this change.

Not only because it's more livable cities
and a better air quality, et cetera, but today

for cost reasons partly, but also because
they can directly benefit from the renewable

electricity, for instance, or the heat that
is being produced.

And I think this is something which allows
?? obviously we need massive infrastructure

and generation, but the fact to also look
into ?? and especially when we are speaking

about energy access ?? a decentralisation.

This allows citizen support and it also allows
an energy ?? the resilience of the energy

infrastructure.

And just I'll take the public transportation
example.

And I think this is really where we have new
alliances to look into.

Public transport, one of the paradigms that
?? or fundamental that needs to be there is

that there is a good service of public transport.

The energy cost is the second ?? when you
look at public transport operators, energy

costs is basically the second part of the
human resources.

Today, it means that investing basically in
renewable energy here allows to reduce the

cost, but it also allows to build up a resilient
energy service, so having energy security

for transport service security.

And this really means that there needs to
be, I guess, a stronger development also of

the narratives.

When we are pushing for the transition to
really think about what players do we engage

with and need to engage with to create the
buy?in on the demand side, so energy consuming

sectors, but also on the citizen side.

I would say, like, renewables is today clearly
cost but a sovereign solution with regard

to this.

But to really make it accepted by all players.

The national municipal governments really
have a key role to play by having incentives,

by creating investment opportunities, having
public procurement, to create markets for

operators to engage, and investing into the
infrastructures.

Thank you very much.

And I want to go now to Rohit Sen and stay
with this question how how do we take everybody

with us?

We're looking at a transformation that is
enormous and very, very expensive.

We are going to see in many cities rent going
up, heating costs going up.

Certainly, we're seeing that right here in
Berlin.

I just got a letter from my energy company.

And it's very complex to know how to deal
with this.

Not only because I was going to be taking
part in this conference, but after receiving

this letter, I went to the owner of my building
and said, what can we do?

What could we do, you know, solar.

We went through the whole list.

Heating pumps and so on.

And we didn't come up with a lot of options,
have to tell you.

And I found myself wishing badly for more
information.

For local initiatives.

For outreach.

So how do we do it?

And I'm talking about from a vantage point
of a person in a wealthy city and a wealthy

country.

How do we ensure we take citizens along in
cities and countries at all levels of development.

So there are a couple of things I quickly
want to mention.

So, first of all, to answer that question,
multi?level governance is in the heart of

this transition, yeah?

It's important that we do not have redundancy
between the work and the targets of the national

government and the local governments.

Second, create resilience.

Create energy security at the city level.

Local region level.

By having decentralised renewable energy was
mentioned here.

You mentioned about the links between urban
and rural.

Very important.

Example, if I may take Frankfurt.

Very high demand during the day.

Drops down like anything during the evening/nighttime.

People start living in suburbs.

The model is going to be the same in Africa.

Going to be the same in Asia?

We don't know.

But things to think about.

Second, rural areas will have land that you
can use for renewable energy generation.

Very important because the demand is in the
cities.

So these interlinkages are very important
to develop the cities of the future.

Awareness creations.

Making consumers as presumers very important.

So that the local government and national
governments, apart from that, the citizens

are getting involved and having a share in
those projects and renewable energy stakes.

So some of them we are now dealing with cities
and regions in our network, and we are trying

to work with them, with various solutions
and methodologies, tools so that these cities,

local governments, stakeholders, private sector,
financial institutions, and most important,

the citizens of those cities are then moving
to this transition together.

And for that dialogue needs to happen.

And then the action and the impact needs to
happen on the ground.

Which is exactly what we're doing right here.

Let's take a look at the results of our Slido
survey about what people thought regarding

the percentage of urban expansion in the developing
world.

And ladies and gentlemen, I'm sorry to say,
you got to wrong.

80% of you thought ?? or let's say 55% of
you think that it is 80%.

Actually, it turns out it's 90%.

That's the smallest share of those responding
to the poll.

20% said they figured it was 90%.

So, in fact, most of us are underestimating
the degree to which urban growth is occurring

in the developing world.

With that said, our clock is flashing at us.

I'm just going to go straight down the panel
and ask for one sentence from everybody about

what you say is the most crucial thing that
has to happen to make sure that cities are

part of the solution in getting us to to Net
Zero by 2050.

Minister, one sentence.

We need government policies.

We need measures taken by urban authorities
and others that make sure we can reach this

objective.

Multi?level governance, was pointed out several
times.

Minister Mey.

Well, I will easily say, let local authority
play their role.

Give them the support from the government,
the private sector, all the different stakeholders,

to execute and realise their policies.

Thank you.

Rana?

Just taking up that angle is defining long?term,
medium term and short?term energy transition

targets at the national level.

In the energy sectors.

And work with the local governments to implement
them.

Because they are the ones who can push from
the energy demand side.

Thank you.

Permanent Secretary?

Yeah, thank you pop for me it will be regulatory
framework.

Decentralisation.

Sustainable urban mobility and communication.

Mm?hmm.

Thank you so much.

Rohit Sen.
Yep, so from my side we heard about finance,

policy, multi?level governments.

These things may happen, may not happen.

We cannot get stuck.

Local governments and cities need to think
out of the box.

Be more innovative, see what tools and policies
you have and what you can bring up in the

forefront to help this transition happen.

To think out of the box.

Think of decentralised mini grids.

Thank you very much.

And finally, Cecelia Andersson.

Yeah, thank you very much.

I think from my side, I'll take the planning
approach.

You were talking about urban expansion.

I think we need to invest in more compact
cities.

Invest in connectivity, walking, cycling infrastructure
so that we can actually lead to also cities

can lead to reduced energy consumption.

Thank you so much.

It's been a really interesting panel.

I'm very grateful to all of you for taking
part and in sharing your insights and experiences.

I certainly have learned a great deal from
all of you.

Let's give them a warm round of applause,
please, ladies and gentlemen.


