Hydrogen will have an important role to play
in reaching net zero carbon emissions by the

middle of the century.

What is the extent of this role and how will
hydrogen redefine international energy partnerships?

How are traditional energy extraordinations
reacting to the developments?

This hydrogen has the potential to enable
greater energy-independence or balance in

energy trade or will it exacerbate already
existing structures of dependency?

And welcome back, ladies and gentlemen.

We have had a very insightful and very intensive
day, and we now want to do our final session

on day 1 of BETD 2022 on this very crucial
topic of whether hydrogen can reset global

energy relations.

And clearly, green hydrogen does offer multiple
opportunities to those countries and regions

that are in a position to harness it.

Whether as producers or as importers.

Yet questions remain, and we discussed this
earlier today when we heard from the heads

of the International Energy Agency and IRENA,
the International Renewable Energy Agency,

about hydrogen's efficiency and scaleability.

Far?sighted infrastructure and R&D investment
will be needed to bring this, one might say,

much?hyped technology to fruition.

And hydrogen will also ?? and we heard it
just now in that short film, reset the global

geopolitics of energy.

Governments and international organisations
have a unique opportunity to proactively shape

this new market in a manner that could maxemise
benefits and minimise risks.

And we want to talk about how that can be
done.

About the foreign policy implications of a
global H2 market and what priorities should

be guiding the new hydrogen diplomacy.

As well as where international cooperation
is most important, both to mitigate risks

and maxemise opportunities.

We have a great panel with us to address all
of those issues.

And I'm going to keep the introductions short
in the interest of time.

And we'll also be very grateful to our speakers
if you could please keep your responses to

the questions concise so that we can hopefully
manage to be interactive and cover as much

material as possible.

So when I say short, I mean about three minutes
per person.

In our original round.

And then two minutes after that.

It is now my pleasure to introduce, starting
at that side of the channel, Dr. Christiane

Averbeck, Board of Directors of the Climate
Alliance Germany, a civil society coalition

with over 140 member organisations.

Welcome to you.

Also with us and very pleased to have her
here is Gauri Singh.

She is with us virtually.

She's Deputy Director General of the International
Renewable Energy Agency.

I mentioned it just a moment ago.

She's had a long career in renewable energy
and sustainable development, amongst other

initiatives, leading the National Solar Mission,
India, 2010.

Great that you can be with us.

Also with us is Omar Paganini, he is the Minister
of Energy, Industry, and Mining for Uruguay.

He brings private sector and academic experience
to his current post.

Great to have you with us as well.

Joining us remotely.

Diego me Isa Puyo is Minister of Mines and
Industry for Colombia and worked as the senior

economist at Price Waterhouse Cooper.

Great to have you on board.

We are waiting on Tom Alweendo.

Minister of energy and mines for Namibia.

We're told he's signing a contract at this
very moment, which sounds important and hopefully

useful.

So we are expecting him to join us imminently.

Shri Alok Kumar is State Secretary in the
ministry Of Power of India.

Has had a long career in a variety of sectors.

Thank you so much for being with us.

Finally seated directly next to me.

Please welcome Neila Gonji.

She will be speaking French, ladies and gentlemen,
so if you'd like a translation, you do have

a headset available here in the room.

I'd like to start with a question to all of
the ministers and policymakers on the panel.

All of your countries aspire to becoming hydrogen
exporters in the near future.

And I'd like to ask you how this will factor
into your foreign policy and strategy and

how you expect it to influence your relations
with other countries.

And we will begin with minister Gonji.

Please.

I'm sorry, I can't hear anything.

I'm sorry.

I guess there is no translation yet.

Is that right?

Okay.

I'm told we're working on it.

The technical team, do you need another minute
or two?

Okay.

We will move on and come back.

so I will go on to Mr. Mesa Puyo if I can.

Thank you.

I think for Colombia, clean energy has both
from an energy and foreign perspective.

Currently, I have to start by saying Colombia
has one of the longest stable democracies

in South America.

We are ?? we believe certainly in multilateralism.

We believe that energy security shouldn't
be an issue.

We are ready toe help Europe and other parts
of the world that are now, you know, struggling

to balance out climate action plans and energy
security.

And I said this because Colombia today is
a net energy exporter.

We mostly export fossil fuels at the moment,
but we have everything in place to become

one of the largest exporters of green hydrogen.

We have world?class resources in wind, in
solar, in water.

We've developed a very robust policy framework
over the last 3 1/2 years with fiscal incentives

for the production of green hydrogen.

And we also have the infrastructure in place
to be able to produce, initially for domestic

market, because we already consume significant
amounts of hydrogen.

We need to replace grey hydrogen with green
hydrogen, but in the medium term, to be able

to export.

So we're pretty much ready.

And we are happy to say that, you know, we
can combine this opportunity from a security

point of view for energy security, but also
from an economic point of view.

And this is, you know, a topic that brings
together both our diplomacy and our energy

capacity and we're ready to deploy it to contribute
to energy security around the world.

And what do you think will change?

So I think the world now is realizing that
energy partnerships have to be ?? strike with

countries that share your same democratic
values.

And given what's going on with the innovation
in Ukraine, which we condemn in the strongest

form possible.

We think it's unprovoked.

We think it's brutal.

That's gonna be the main decision factor now
going forward.

We would like to depend on allies that share
your same democratic values that respect the

rule of law, that respect democracy, and that's
gonna be a key factor going forward, for Europe

but for the world as a whole.

Thank you very much.

We'll take a deeper dive on that in a moment.

Let me say hello to the Minister of Mines
and Energy of Namibia, Tom Alweendo.

Wonderful that you can join us.

We're just beginning so you haven't missed
too much.

We're talking right now about how hydrogen
could reset countries' foreign policy, reset

their energy relations and diplomacy, and
we've just heard from the Costa Rican minister.

I will go now to the Tunisian minister because
our translation is available.

Madam Gonji, please.

Yes, Tunisia has very ambitious programmes
to develop renewable energies based on solar

and wind.

We are now in the process of switching to
this new system of transforming our system.

So we would like to rely heavily on green
hydrogen.

Because of the potential it has to offer in
Tunisian.

We're talking about desalination of sea water,
thus we can produce green hydrogen.

We're working on a pilot project to move towards
the production of green ammonia, because we

do have a large phosphorous processing industry,
fertilising industry, and we'd like to produce

green fertiliser.

Our foreign policies are in line with this
strategy.

We co?operate with our European partners.

There is a programme that unites European
countries, Mediterranean countries with Germany,

by the way.

We have an additional programme, accompanying
programme of studies and pilot projects.

And thus we intend to work out a plan for
the production of green hydrogen.

The ties we have between Tunisia and Italy
for the transport of gas, these will be used

for other purposes.

We want to be able to transport hydrogen.

We're pursuing active policies and diplomatic
relations because we intend to co?operate

with European partners in order to make all
this happen.

To that question question also about the transformability
of existing infrastructure for gas into repurposing

for hydrogen.

Let me go now to Minister Tom Alweendo, if
I could, with the same question.

Talk, if you would, please, about how you
see the advent of hydrogen.

Your country also has ambitions to become
a hydrogen exporter.

How you see that as changing your country's
international energy relations.

Thank you very much.

My apologies for coming a bit late.

In fact, I was late because I was conducting
hydrogen diplomacy, so that's why I took a

bit longer to come here.

Namibia, we are one of those lucky countries
where we've got really world?class renewable

resources.

I can talk about the wind.

I can talk about the solar.

We are really, I think, where we are geographically
located as a country, we have got great resources.

And that will then put us in the position
where we can actually be one of the front?runners

in the creation of green hydrogen assets.

Such that last year, we went out to the market
and we issued an RFP to identify companies

that want to collaborate with us in producing
these assets.

At COP last year in Glasgow, we announced
the preferred data for this RFP.

And we are now busy with a company called
Hyphen.

Some of you might know.

Is the people we are working together to actually
produce this asset.

And that really put us in a very, very good
position.

But for that also to work, the energy diplomacy,
the collaboration that we need, we need to

have partners to work with us.

Because the green hydrogen or the ammonia
that's going to be produced, it will be much,

much more than what we need as a country.

It will be much, much more than what the region
needs, for example, and therefore we need

to find markets where we need actually to
export this product.

So far, we have been talking to the EU, with
the EU.

We've been talking to the governments like
the German governments.

We have signed an MOU with the German governments.

We have signed an MOU with the Belgian government.

We have also signed an MOU with Rotterdam.

We have those kinds of collaborations to make
sure that we quickly transform into actions,

you know, the theme of this event is say let's
transform the word into actions.

And I think once you get all these partners
together, it's gonna be much, much easier

than for you to actually transform words into
action.

And we look forward to having this collaboration
going forward.

And collaboration is something we're also
going to take a deeper dive on a little bit

later.

Let me go over now to our Minister from Uruguay,
Mr. Paganini, and also ask you to address

the same issue of where you see this resetting
your country's energy, international energy

relations.

Well, hello to the audience.

Especially to Diego, who I know.

Who I met last year.

As you know, Uruguay has a renewable energy
policy already for 12 years.

We have transformed our electricity matrix.

97% of our electricity now is from renewable
resources.

We have good wind and sun and we have a good
combination of wind and sun that has allowed

us to do this.

We have a lot of land and water.

So we can go forward and move strongly into
hydrogen.

To do that, we have been carrying out some
studies and are ready to announce the roadmap

together with consulting firms such as McKenzie.

And tomorrow specifically, we are announcing
the first pilot project in hydrogen in Uruguay.

Of course, the same with many of our countries
that are seated in this panel.

Our local needs of electricity being say small
country with 3.5 million people are reduced.

So we have to think about exports as a natural
way to carry out the hydrogen initiatives.

And of course that means not only to export
hydrogen, but maybe to start in the export

of derivatives such as methanol or wind kerosene.

That is our roadmap and we're announcing it
very shortly.

And of course these goals fit very well into
our national policy of decarbonizing, but

also it fits with our international policy
of opening and diversifying our markets.

Maybe you're not aware, but Uruguay is a food
producer and a forestry producer.

And more and more our main customer is China.

Historically, however, we have been ?? we
have very strong ties with the European Union

and the West.

So we believe strongly that hydrogen is a
way to strengthen our ties with the West,

with democracies, with the cultural legacy
we have.

So we have been working together with the
Port of Rotterdam, the German government to

make possible this hydrogen transition.

We are looking forward to take part in the
initiatives that the German government is

putting forward, such as H2 Global.

And presenting private projects in Uruguay
to supply hydrogen derivatives to the German

market.

There is no doubt that for the hydrogen economy
to take place, there has to be a strong partnership

with countries demanding hydrogen and its
derivatives and countries that can produce

it and have a surplus of it.

So I ?? we visualise a process in which Europe
especially and South America can strengthen

their ties in these partnerships.

Whether technology comes maybe from the European
companies.

And the demand comes from the European market
and also maybe other markets such as Japan.

And our countries with the rich and renewable
resources in the case of Uruguay, a longtime

experience in changing our energy matrix to
generate renewable electricity can move forward

and transform it into an export.

Thank you, Minister.

We'll pick up on the theme of cooperation
again a little bit later.

Let me just go to State Secretary Kumar now
please.

Also a brief word for how India sees it.

Thank you very much.

India has moved very fast on energy transition.

And we have made I think very good progress,
very significant progress in our national

climate contributions.

Both in terms of the growth of renewable energy
as well as energy efficiency.

See, now in the COP, announced another plan,
Net Zero by 2070.

We have a long?term plan to do this.

And hydrogen is a very major initiative.

It's a very big potential.

We also realize that the development of hydrogen
is a cost effective substitute to both non?fossil

fuels coal and gas can't be done by any country
single?handedly.

It needs international cooperation.

Talking of our foreign policy orientation,
there has been very forward?looking.

We have launched two initiatives.

The International Solar Alliance and our Prime
Minister has given the call for one sun, one

world, one grid.

We see that hydrogen will provide another
big window to collaborate with the International

Community which will enable India also to
develop hydrogen as a low?cost solution.

And we will also be benefitted by international
cooperation and partnership in terms of trade,

R&D, technology.

We have done already quite a lot of work.

We have set up a dedicated task force with
the U.S.

We have launched a clean energy partnership
with Japan.

And we have also included the green hydrogen
as one of the key pillars in our ongoing partnership

with Australia.

And very shortly, we are very keen to do it
with Germany also.

Let me just mention the last thing.

That India has significant strengths.

The endowed areas for solar and wind and a
robust national grid.

Which can connect the production areas and
the export centres.

So India sees that hydrogen is a very big
opportunity for very effective distribution.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

And I would like now to go to our two non?policymakers
on the panel.

Starting with Christiane Averbeck and go over
to Gauri Singh to talk about, put into perspective

about what we have been hearing.

Clearly, there are very high hopes in a large
number of countries, by no means confined

to this group that we have with us here, in
terms of where hydrogen will take them and

also their own ability to become hydrogen
exporters.

And, in fact, IRENA, which Gauri Singh does
represent, pointed out in its latest study

the build?up of a global hydrogen economy
will fundamentally redefine the international

energy landscape and the geopolitics of energy.

So I'd like to ask the two of you, how do
you see the geopolitics of hydrogen differing

from those of a fossil fuel?based system?

Where do you see the most disruptive changes
and challenges?

And will the system that emerges be more stable?

So, Christiane, please.

Actually, that's what I'm hoping for.

That's what we asked for for many years, that
we have to get out of fossil fuels as soon

as possible.

Now, I'm quite excited that all of these ministers
are here.

It shows that they are on the right track,
I would say.

At least that they go into green hydrogen
and some of the countries were into fossil

fuels for many, many years.

And we saw the destructive signs of fossil
fuels.

And therefore, no, I think this is a good
development that we are some years down the

line are now pushing for green hydrogen.

And I'm ?? we have to focus on green hydrogen.

I would like to emphasise that.

And that means that coming to the opportunities,
I think that it means that there will be ?? different

countries will have the opportunity to produce
green hydrogen ?? I don't know.

Different countries will have the opportunity
to produce green hydrogen.

The Minister of Namibia already told us how
the potentials are.

But what we have to make sure is that sustainable
?? sustainability criteria are considered.

So that we are not running into other risks
that we don't want at the moment.

We don't want that we have conflicts about
water use, land?grabbing.

We fear that corruption could come in place.

We fear that human rights are not considered.

We fear as a civil society organisation that
it's a deal between governments, but that

the local people in the area that are affected
where you establish the power plants, the

renewable power plants are not considered
and that energy poverty, you know, it should

not contribute, but you ?? it should assist
your countries who ?? I've lived for quite

some time also in southern Africa and know
that energy poverty is still a big topic.

So you have to make sure that also your people
have the opportunity and access to energy.

So that the energy is not only ?? the green
hydrogen is not only exported to a country

like Germany, but they do make use of this
new source.

Thanks very much.

Let me go over to Guarin Singh.

And that study that I mentioned by IRENA points
out a number of disruptive changes and challenges

that could either ?? well, changes that could
boost hydrogen's potential as a system stabiliser,

but challenges that could reduce that potential.

So could you just briefly take us through
some of those?

Thanks, Melinda, and thanks for having me
on the panel.

You're absolutely right that, you know, we
are at some level the same place where we

were with solar a decade back and where there
were countries that were very aggressively

going forward with their targets.

We have currently almost 30 countries that
are looking at strategies to be either importers

or exporters of green hydrogen.

And what it's also doing is it's unlocking
areas of high potential of renewable energy

which were otherwise not really in the, you
know, which were not really being employed.

So in a sense, it's giving that opportunity
of converting the technical potential of renewable

energy into the actual potential by moving
into green hydrogen.

But clearly, while we do see that, you know,
there will be many more countries which will

enter into a bilateral relationship to start
with, but what we also see is that there will

be more of a trend of regionalisation of the
energy trade.

Which is very different from what we see right
now.

There will be an element of continuity because
we also see some of the, you know, the current

energy producers, whether they're in the Middle
East or Australia or other countries, who

are also trying to pivot into blue and green
hydrogen.

And it'll really depend, you know, how fast
they're able to pivot and make it a mainstay

will be extremely important thing to watch.

But as a recent sector, it's extremely important
that the government continues to support it

with a very clear policy framework and give
this a long?term visibility of the market,

of the demand.

Because that's when investments will be able
to come in.

And I think that's going to be a critical
challenge.

Thank you very much.

And I want to get to those two points in just
a moment.

Let's do a very quick audience poll at this
juncture.

We have the following question for the audience
to vote on.

And, again, I think you know by now how to
vote.

In fact, many of you appear to have already
voted.

But let me give you a chance to keep on voting.

I'm not sure whether everybody's weighed in.

The question is, an abundance of which resource
will be most decisive in building up a comp

hydrogen export economy?

And this really gets at two things.

It gets at some of the confusion that's out
there in between green hydrogen and other

forms of hydrogen.

And it also gets at this question of, what
are the fundamental prerequisites for companies

to ?? countries to become very competitive
in this area?

Because we see so many contenders.

In many ways, this session is almost like
a pitch, you know?

Where each of you laying out your big plans.

And so the question will be, who is likely
to move ahead in this ?? in this friendly

competition?

So I'm gonna let the audience keep on voting,
and essentially come to that question.

And Minister Alweendo, Namibia has excellent
geographic conditions for the production of

hydrogen.

You talked about the production of renewables.

The same can be said for neighbouring countries
which have big aspirations.

So what differentiates you from others.

What would you say are the crucial prerequisites
that need to be met?

A lot of things differentiate.

As I said, not only the existence of the resource
itself, but also the policy that has to buttress

those resources.

It's one thing to have the resource.

How do you actually get it out?

How do you produce it?

Maybe before I even go there, my neighbour
says that let's make sure when we do this,

we don't make it worse for some people.

And I think that's where the issue of a just
transition comes in.

You don't want to make a situation worse whereby
now suddenly we have all of these green hydrogen

sites going all over and then actually displacing
some people.

Or making some people or communities worse
off.

So that's a very important point to be made.

To say people ?? the producing countries,
the people in the producing country must make

?? be made to feel that actually they've got
something to benefit from it, and, therefore,

they embrace what needs to be done.

But as I said now, in Namibia, not only do
we have the resource, but what system do you

have?

How are you going to make sure that the green
hydrogen that you are going to produce is

really green hydrogen?

Who is going to define what it is?

Is it going to be the producing country only
or is it going to be the consuming country?

If you're exporting, probably bother.

Not only the producing but also the consuming
markets.

You need to start to have, you know, global
standards that are understood by everybody.

To say if you want to say you are as a country
exporting green hydrogen, that's what it is.

Namibia, as I said, we are neighbouring with
South Africa, for example.

We do not want to be competitors with our
neighbours.

Nor do we want to be competitors with countries
far away like Colombia.

My friend Diego.

We need to be collaborators.

This is a huge industry that is starting.

It's not something that can be satisfied by
one country or by one region.

And because of that also, likely is that it
will be different from the fossil fuel, from

the oil, for example.

Because you had few countries, you know, having
oil.

But suddenly you have got regions, you've
got various countries, and therefore the future

of vast industry will probably really be different.

But as I say, once we are now starting all
doing this, we do not need to be competitors

at all.

We actually need to be collaborators, to learn
from each other and how to make sure that

the industry actually becomes a very stable
industry where all of us can participate in

that industry.

Again, I want to ask all of the Ministers
to weigh in on these points.

I'm looking at the clock, though.

We have a big panel and not a lot of time.

If you would be so kind to keep your answers
pretty short, we can hopefully get in a couple

more rounds of discussion.

Madam, I wanted to ask you the same question.

One of the things that will distinguish producers
is the degree to which they have essentially

policy frameworks that ensure transparency,
that ensure that certain standards are followed.

Would you agree with that assessment?

And if so, what is Tunisia doing in that area?

Absolutely.

Absolutely.

We are fazing out fossil fuels and moving
towards green energy sources that are closer

to our citizens.

I'm telling you that against the backdrop
of the new industry and new economy that is

developing, we need to work on this.

We need to make sure that everyone co?operates
and co?ordinates.

Of course, some may have a competitive advantage
as opposed to others, but we need to talk

about what the options for collaborating in
terms of renewable energies and also green

hydrogen.

Not only at a regional level, but also international
level.

We also need to look at the legal framework.

Of course, another aspect we want to address
?? we need to address is how we can improve

relations between countries.

At the level of our government, we are working
on regulatory frameworks to make ?? to open

the market in the best way possible.

We want to make sure that our European partners
are able, also including other partners, but

mainly Germany, Italy, and France to co?operate
with us, especially with the Meena region

also.

We want to create a cooperation that is as
open as possible.

We also want to create the best possible benefits
of this new economy, this new industry.

I already addressed the existing gas pipeline
we want to use.

I also want to draw your attention to the
fact that we are co?operating and want to

co?operate with European countries in order
to assess how we can use this existing pipeline

for hydrogen.

So regarding our strategic approach, we are
facing a new era.

And we want to make sure that we can use existing
infrastructure.

This also applies to power lines and the like.

For solar energy and hydropower and the like
and wind power.

This opens up a new chapter.

Pick up on repurposing hopefully a little
later.

Let me go to Latin America with Ministers
Meza and Paganini and ask you to tie up the

regional with the international.

I think both of you mentioned regional uses.

At the moment, Latin America is using hydrogen
mainly as a feedstock for refineries and for

the chemistry.

So talk to us a little bit about how you see
the region transitioning to low?carbon production

of hydrogen and what preconditions need to
be met for Latin America to play a leading

role in an international H2 market?

Please.

Sure.

Thank you, Melinda.

And I think both Omar and Tom mentioned something
that is a challenge but a significant opportunity.

Not only for Latin American countries that
have potential, but also in Africa, as we

heard before.

And it's that the potential capacity to produce
clean energy and therefore clean or green

hydrogen exceeds by a longshot what we can
consume internally.

So, yes, we need to start by replacing the
consumption of grey or hydrogen in our countries.

Which is small.

But very quickly we have to position ourselves
to be able to become net exporters of green

hydrogen.

So I think, you know, to begin with, those
industrial uses is going to help us become

more competitive.

We're already doing that in Colombia.

Two weeks ago, we put into operation the first
two green hydrogen projects in our country.

One in the refinery.

As you said.

And the second one which we see as an intermediate
step is to blend green hydrogen with natural

gas for the distribution network.

That's a new use that is going to help us
expand.

But at the end, what we need to do is be able
to export either green hydrogen in its pure

form or as derivative, as we've been talking
about.

So ammonia, methanol, jet fuel, and other
uses.

So ?? but the great advantage here for us
is that our capacity far exceeds the demand

that we have locally.

Thanks so much.

Minister Paganini.

Well, Diego has been very clear in this.

Just to fill in more details.

Uruguay still uses 40% of its energy from
fossil fuels.

All the fossil is imported.

We don't have local oil and gas.

And hydrogen is very marginal here as a byproduct
of the refining process.

So all the growth of the electricity generation
we will build from now on will be completely

renewable, as it has been for 12 years, and
the use for hydrogen is clearly for green

hydrogen.

No other option is available for us.

Also, the development of green hydrogen facilities
in Uruguay and chemical plants to produce

methanol, for example, has to be far away
from the capital city.

So it's very good for us from a relevant point
of view.

Uruguay does not have energy poverty.

In a sense, 99.6% of our population is connected
to the public grid.

Fortunately we are a small country with a
simple geography.

So I think in the national level, we have
local news very clearly aimed at transportation

and some industry usage, but this will be
small and will not be available alone.

It has to be joined with exports, as I said,
before.

In the regional point of view, I think Latin
America has much more renewable sources than

its local demand and it has to together go
and move into a lower producer of hydrogen

and its derivatives.

It will take some time.

It needs international cooperation.

It needs to define standards.

Security ruling and regulation in a worldwide
way.

And partnering with the demand in developed
countries.

So it will take some time.

It will take logistics develop.

But it has to be a co?operative endeavour
of the whole world.

We think.

Thank you so much.

State Secretary Kumar, we heard a lot of discussion
about energy independence and energy security.

I saw that Prime Minister Modi said that hydrogen
could help lead India to make a quantum leap

to energy independence by 2047.

So are national security concerns a key driver
for you when it comes to hydrogen?

Thank you, once again.

Let me say hydrogen mission, we have launched
a very ambitious national emissions.

It meets two key objectives.

One is our energy security.

Making India energy independent by 2047.

And also completing our goal of energy transition.

So we import sort of coal for our steel.

We import a lot of gas.

So the idea is that we initiate this mission
in the sectors where it is easy to initiate.

Like refinery, the fertilisers and some city
gas.

India has a very successful model of sharply
reducing cost by scaling up.

I'll give you two examples.

We've done this in LED lighting, both in households
and in streetlights and the same for solar

PV.

The costs have come down.

So India is aiming to implement the same model
of rapidly scaling up by building up obligations

in refining the fertilisers and city gas.

And working very closely with the International
Community to develop and further refine the

technology, the standards in R&D.

And in that process, we see the export of
green hydrogen is an important element of

our strategy to scale up the demand and production.

To sharply reduce costs.

Once you are able to do this, maybe in the
next five, six years, then India will be ready

to implement those achievements in the sectors
like transport and steel.

So that is a reason that the hydrogen will
fulfil both objectives.

As well as energy independence.

To begin scaling up.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Let me go to Christiane Averbeck to talk about
the hydrogen use application here in Germany.

You said that hydrogen should only be used
in applications where there is no alternative.

Germany sees hydrogen as particularly important
for hard to decarbonize, hard to abate sectors.

For example, like energy.

Like industry and energy.

Would you agree with that?

And if so, do you think that the German strategy
is on the right track to get there?

Actually, I would say that the national hydrogen
strategy is a little bit outdated.

It was developed two years ago.

And you can see that after two years, things
have changed dramatically.

I mean, not only through the war in Ukraine.

Gas is normally a bridge.

I mean, that's fossil gas.

And therefore, we have to consider all these
new developments.

We see that hydrogen is very scarce right
now.

We've unfortunately in the last legislation
not done enough in investing in renewable

energies.

Now we are a bit late, I would say, and, unfortunately,
now the government now has really has to speed

up in such a dramatic way that it means that
when using hydrogen ?? I mean green hydrogen.

We should focus on green hydrogen.

We should focus on using it only in certain
sectors.

And I agree with what was said in the IRENA
presentation.

That we should concentrate on the chemistry
sector.

We should ?? and the steel industry.

In ?? how do you call it?

In ships.

Yeah.

But not in heating and not in individual traffic.

I mean, that's quite ?? mobility ?? I think
what is missing in the strategy, and I think

they have to work on it again and have to
actually develop a new strategy.

And I think the government's also working
on that.

At least that's what I'm hoping for.

Thank you very much.

Let me go back to Gauri Singh now.

I'd like to talk about money.

Hydrogen does remain costly when it is produced
with renewable energy.

And development of infrastructure so far has
been slow.

And, of course, this is also where the repurposing
issue comes into it, but which investment

considerations along the hydrogen value chain
will be most likely to influence the future

market?

Where do policymakers and investors really
need to be watching how the money flows in

order to shape a market that is ?? that is
truly efficient and optimises the potential?

So I think, Melinda, what's going to be very
critical is putting money for spurring innovation

and also putting money into R&D.

Because this is, again, a very nascent sector
where a lot of work needs to be done on technologies

and getting them customised to the conditions
that countries would be operating them in.

But apart from that, I think a very serious
issue will be access to a low?cost ?? which

basically means that apart from what policymakers
need to think about creating the markets as

what was pointed out by Mr. Kumar about, you
know, creating the ?? creating obligations

and creating the market that will attract
private investment in.

But also because this is a new sector.

So banks are not going to be really forthcoming
to fund this.

So there will need to be investments and the
policy signals from government to make sure

that, you know, there is a ?? there is a mechanism
to do some kind of risk mitigation.

And create the enabling framework for investments
from private sector to come in.

Thank you very much.

I just want to go very briefly back to Christiane
Averbeck because I want to start talking about

cooperation.

Just a brief question to you essentially for
that external perspective.

All of our speakers have emphasised that this
has to be a collaborative approach.

It has to involve cooperation.

Certainly, that would distinguish development
of a hydrogen economy from what we saw at

the inception of the fossil fuel industry.

Where it was often a race to the bottom, wasn't
it?

It was often not about standards.

It was not about consideration of local populations.

And so on.

Do you think countries are going to walk the
talk when it comes to cooperation?

Actually, I hope they do, because I think
that ?? I'm sure that also the world has changed.

I mean, also the Paris Agreement, we are realizing
that we are sitting in one boat, and my hope

is that everybody is realizing that going
into green hydrogen is also a wonderful opportunity

to develop a new world of cooperation and
considering and respecting the needs and requirements

that all the different countries have in the
world.

And especially also the challenges that all
the countries have.

I mean, when it comes to water security, for
example.

Or, you know, the availability of land.

Thank you very much.

So let's do one last round where each of you,
and I'll start again with the Ministers, tells

us what you think are the most important co?operative
endeavours.

You know, maybe it's funding.

Maybe it's standards and norms.

But whatever it is, your priority and then
also, second part, whether you think that

the new geopolitics of an international hydrogen
economy will be more stable than the energy

system that we have now.

So I'll start with Minister Alweendo first.

Thanks, Melinda.

I think this industry has a better chance
for countries to co?operate.

You know why I'm saying that?

Is because this is not just a commodity.

It's not just a country producing something.

We are doing this because we want to carbonise
the climate.

You want to do something.

There is an end to it.

And therefore, whether you are a producing
country or you are a consuming country, you're

doing something because you need to address
this climate change.

And therefore that in itself is the issue
really enthuse better collaboration.

Yes, you're going to fled the market.

The question about funding.

It's very, very important how competitive
it's going to be.

Who is going to provide that capital?

But then again, if there is a market, there
will always be money to be found.

And therefore let's also start really earnestly
addressing the issue of the markets.

The hard to abate, you know, industry.

How committed are they also to start shifting
to green hydrogen.

Once you do that, obviously there is a market
and therefore the capital is going to follow.

But I also do agree any new industry also
be hesitant and therefore countries need to

have policy that has got some incentives built
into that to actually address capital.

The multinational or the multi?DFIs need to
get involved.

How do they actually make sure that long,
sustainable funding, you know, the pipeline

for that to happen.

So funding is in the market, those are the
things to do that, but I'm sure ?? I am actually

hopeful that there will be much more cohesion
in terms of how the countries are going to

co?operate this because this is not just producing
energy and selling it, but, rather, we need

to address the climate change.

Thank you so much.

Madam Gonji.

I believe the problems that the International
Community is facing are additional problems.

They come on top of the climate problem we
have.

And this is what the Paris Conference showed
quite clearly and COP26 showed that.

We are facing a new era.

That is true for all countries.

So international cooperation needs to be one
of the main challenges we need to tackle right

now at the national level and at the international
level.

Compliance with standards and regulations.

We need to follow words with actions.

And we need to be more co?operative at the
international level.

Finances must be made available for current
and future political strategies.

So we can put our plans into action.

As far as the market is concerned, I believe
the markets do exist.

They are there.

For renewable energies and for green hydrogen.

So when you look at the situation as it is
today and you think of the crisis in Ukraine,

I do believe there is a market for green hydrogen.

But the conditions must be right.

They must be well?thought?through and analysed.

So that at an international level, and a good
and regular cooperation is possible.

Yes, I do think that financing is key.

I think the demand for green hydrogen is there.

I think the supply is there, but we need to
make sure that we level that because if you

look at the prices that the demand is willing
to offer, it's not going to match what the

supply requires for these projects to close
financially.

So I think there is a significant effort that
has to be done to massively fund green hydrogen

projects in the short term to get the market
going.

One example that H2 Global in Germany is doing
is, you know, putting 100 million Euros to

close that financing gap.

But that's not enough.

That's for, you know, ten years, for three
different applications.

So we're talking about 10 million ?? 30 million
per year, which is not enough.

We need maybe 100 times that, and once we
are able to produce this competitively then

we can think about having a market operating
normally.

And then second point on cooperation, I think
it's absolutely key.

We've seen it here with Africa, with North
Africa, with Latin America.

What I said before that we have excess potential
capacity in renewables.

It's also going to be matched with that Europe
in particular and some countries in Asia are

not able to produce enough clean energy that
they demand.

So I think we have the right forces in place.

We just need to make sure that we close the
gap from a financial point of view to begin

with.

Thank you very much.

Minister Paganini?

Well, very shortly, of course, we think green
hydrogen is really needed to ?? the difficult

decarbonisation processes.

The part that is not easy to decarbonise.

Just as with renewable electricity.

So it's imperative to go forward with this.

I think the world is showing we should go
forward quicker.

Of course I agree with Diego that the main
challenge here is to help the market to build.

Market building, I would call it, and that
is a financial thing where supply and demand

have to have the long?term stability so that
long?term investments take place.

And that means have to be guaranteed in a
way for any project to be built.

So that I think is a big challenge and I think
the H2 Global example that Diego put is a

right way to go, but it should be much wider
in different ways.

Once the market gets going, I think there
is the demand and the supply and different

parts of the world.

Of course, also collaboration is needed for
standards, for new technology, for the new

developments, and that will take place, but
once the market starts working, things go

forward.

I think it will be a more stable future regarding
energy if green hydrogen takes place because

it would be a more diversified world with
different regions of the world being suppliers

and other regions being buyers.

And this is not what we have now, so this
geopolitically is much more stable.

And also it's ?? I would like to emphasise
that we all get together to complete a global

goal, that is to end climate change.

So in that way, I think we are looking forward
to a new future that has to be accelerated.

Thank you very much.

Now to Secretary Kumar, please.

Thank you.

I think there are two areas we should focus
on collaboration.

First is how do we meet that demand, sorry.

Procurements will be the key.

How fast we are able to drive down the cost
of hydrogen will depend on its faster adoption

for the energy transition.

There is an urgency for ?? if you see the
world around moving away from fossil fuels

and also to see that it is more diversified.

Secondly, I feel is the collaboration for
R&D and flow of technology in a manner that

the manufacturing of electrolyzers and other
key supply chain elements are more diversified

across the globe.

They are not concentrated in one or two countries
because that would create problems for all

of us.

These are two things in my mind which are
very important for international collaboration.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

And with little time left on the clock, let
me first take a quick look at the results

of the audience poll, and then I want to get
a last word from Christiane and Gauri.

It more or less stated ?? we saw it before
?? clearly the vast majority of the audience,

at 90%, views the availability of renewables
as the crucial factor for green hydrogen.

With that in mind, let me now go to our two
external perspectives, the non?policymakers

on the panel.

And I think I'll start this time with Gauri.

Because Gauri Singh, that IRENA report that
I've mentioned several times it clearly views

the design of norms and standards as a key,
key collaborative endeavour in bringing green

hydrogen to its full potential.

So who can drive that?

Who is key, central for arriving at the kind
of standards that can ensure transparency

and truly green hydrogen?

You're absolutely correct, Melinda.

And, you know, this is going to be, apart
from everything else we've heard from the

panellists, this is going to be the critical
hinge on which a successful development of

green hydrogen markets will depend on.

And we don't want to see fragmented markets
or regulated ?? regulatory competition or

trade values getting directed.

What we want to see is very coherent, transparent
rules and regulations and standards getting

put in place.

And that will only happen if countries come
together, not in a competitive spirit but

in a spirit of collaboration.

This ?? and I think this is where we would
really urge the countries to come together

and build these transparent standards for
markets to dwell up.

And I know that IRENA didn't take a fully
concrete position on whether a new hydrogen

economy will be more stable than the energy
system we have now, but it kind of leaned

in one direction, didn't it?

Well, in a sense, we think that because of
the very diverse set of countries that are

coming in, and also the process which is not
really depend on barometers.

It's a manufacturing process.

So we do expect that this would be much more
of a diversified energy system that we will

see evolving.

Thank you very much.

And finally, Christiane Averbeck, you have
the last word.

Again, your key priority for collaboration
going forward and that question about stability.

I would say that all the ministers here have
it in their hands also to make it more stable.

And therefore, I would really like to encourage
you to consider not only your economic interests,

but that you really have the possible sustainability
criteria in mind and see, I mean, how challenging

things can be when you ?? like what we see
with the war in Ukraine.

When you depend too much on certain energy
sources.

And maybe this is really a warning.

And keep that in your mind when establishing
the new system.

And please involve your people.

Don't think that you on the top level have
it all or know it all, but consider those

that are on the ground and have to sort of
?? are challenged then by your decisions.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to all of you for this
very, very interesting exchange about an enormously

dynamic future source of energy.

Greatly appreciate your being with us.

To all of you, and also, of course, to our
remote guests.

Thank you so much for dialling in.

And dear ladies and gentlemen, that brings
our panel to an end, and I'm also very, very

grateful to our audience.

Thank you.

Yes, let's give them a warm round of applause.


