We all know that energy access is essential for 
bringing people out of poverty. And while strides  

have been made in recent years, it is estimated 
that around 1.03 billion people around the world,  

a figure we heard earlier today, still do not have 
access to electricity. There is no one size fits  

all solution to providing energy. And each of the 
available solutions operates at different scales  

and serves different specific needs. In this 
panel on energy access, my guests and I are  

going to take a look at energy access.
Joining me now here live in the studio,  

Dr. Habtamu Itefa, the Minister of Water 
and Energy from Ethiopia. Thank you.  

Dr. Ajay Mathur from India, and Antonio 
Reynosos. The COO of New Energy Nexus, Pradhan.  

And two guests joining us virtually, Wanjira 
Mathai, Vice President and regional director  

for Africa World Resources Institute. And also 
virtually is Dr. Jorge Rivera Staff, the National  

Secretary of Energy for Panama. Thank you for 
joining me from here in Berlin or from your home.  

I want to get into our first round of questions. I 
have one to address to each of you and ask you to  

limit your responses to around 90 seconds if you 
can. I know, it's very easy to do. What concrete  

actions need to be taken to achieve sustainable 
-- I'm sorry, to achieve access to affordable,  

reliable, sustainable and modern energy 
for all? I would like to start with our  

two virtual guests -- I'm sorry, with the first 
guest in the studio, Minister Habtamu Itefa.
 

Thank you very much. A very critical 
part where to start. The critical  

action is to know what resources we have. 
Today we can see globally the main source of  

energy is that we need to have a paradigm shift. 
That is not sustainable in the longer term. In the  

globe, every nation has their own specific energy 
and has to be identified. hydro power, solar,  

wind. We need to access afford ability, 
sustainability and accessibility issues.
 

Thank you. Now to the first digital GWAS, Minister 
Jorge Rivera Staff on what we need to have  

to access sustainable and modern energy for all.
 

Thank you for the opportunity to be 
here again in the BETD. For Panama,  

it's a great opportunity to show what we are 
doing and share some ideas. You know? For us,  

there is a direct link in when 
energy transition -- between  

energy transition and the universal access 
when you talk about affordable reason reliable,  

and sustainable energy. We are talking about 
SDG7, and talking to the world to develop.
 

As part of our national energy 
transition agenda, the first  

strategy for that agenda will align to the year 
2030 is the university access strategy. And  

what concrete actions we are implementing in 
that is we are just stepping in as a priority.  

One, to identify specifically the areas and 
population that needs to be closed the gap.  

Second, to state specifically the biggest amount 
of data. To do that on the resources that we  

need to -- we are estimate in Panama around $500 
million. And to state the positive externalities  

that the fulfillment of the SDG7 brings to whole 
the development of the country, but also in the  

economic recovery that we need right now.
Thank you very much, Minister. I would  

like to go next to a guest here in the studio. 
Minister Reynosos, concrete steps and actions.  

Oh, I would like to remind you to use 
your march so everyone can hear you.  

I think it's already on. Fantastic.
Thank you so much. In the Dominican Republic,  

we have a special unit to improve the rural 
education. Some of our communities in -- all  

around the countries. We had more than 10 million 
and a half population in the Dominican Republic.  

And around 98% of the population had access 
to the energy. Especially to electricity.  

The main option, the following option. First, 
to create, and we create already, a special  

unit in the ministry of energy and 
mines of the Dominican Republic.  

Which improve, which build facilities to access 
the people in the remote area to the electricity.
 

Which introduced the project with solar 
panel in our rural communities. We  

had to target very important target is roll out to 
schools. And we introduced micro hydro power. And  

also wind energy systems. But the main instruments 
are solar panel and the micro hydro facilities.
 

Thank you, Minister. I would like to ask you next, 
Aneri Pradhan, concrete actions we need to take.
 

Sure. Thank you for having me here. First we all 
know that solar and wind is the cheapest form of  

electricity. Especially solar. So, the fossil fuel 
industry, however, is still being bankrolled by  

investors. governments are still supporting this 
industry. Even though it's now truly archaic.  

So, the concrete steps really needed is supporting 
entrepreneurs and startups to really, truly scale  

technologies that can proliferate through 
adoption. So, and that requires government  

working with startups, the private sector, and 
civil society all together. Governments can remove  

the barriers that allows these technologies to 
proliferate. Civil society groups need to be  

continued to be funded and supported to advocate 
for cleaner energy transitions. And New Energy  

Nexus, who I represent, truly believes that's 
100% clean energy for 100% of the population.
 

I see you nodding your head, 
concrete actions, Ajay Mathur.
 

The long and the short is, yes, resources matter. 
And if you have access to solar energy or wind,  

as Aneri said, that is the source of choice. 
Why is it the source of choice? Because today  

solar and wind are the cheapest forms of 
electricity when the sun is shining and when the  

wind is blowing. What happens when it isn't? And 
that's where mini grids come in. If you ask me,  

the best option today is mini grids for rural 
electrification. What do governments need to do?  

Make the regulatory provisions. What's the 
size to which we can do without any approvals?  

What is it that would happen when the grid reach 
there is? What is the tariffs? Hopefully they can  

set their tariffs according to what their 
consumers are willing and able to play.
 

if you do these, you will see solar mini grids 
coming up like mushrooms. We have an example  

of a company that's now set up with 
the regulatory mechanisms in place.  

They have set up 300. They plan to 
go to 1,000 by the end of next year.  

And they've attracted 40% of their funding from a 
Japanese financial company. So, it's economically  

viable as well. And it meets everybody's needs. 
Has no solar emissions -- has no carbon emissions.  

It's a win-win-win situation.
It does sound like a win-win-win situation.  

Now to Wanjira Mathai, our last 
digital contributor today.
 

I couldn't agree more with my fellow 
panelists. The truth is Africa has 75%  

of the energy access gap. And unless we are 
not listening, this is significant. And it's  

a massive stumbling block. So, finance, as has 
been mentioned, it's crucial. It is the beginning  

of where we have to start. Sub-Saharan African 
countries require annual investment of 28 billion  

my 2030. And this is according to the IEA. Now, 
this is about mini grids. Now it's about grids.  

And it's also about off-grid investment. So, 
finance is crucial to be able to put in place.
 

But I want to add another point that adds to 
the many wonderful points that have been made.  

And that is about modernizing power 
infrastructure to support the reliability,  

flexibility, and sustainability of energy. So, 
a reliable and strong system with flexibility to  

integrate the variable renewable energy sources 
is key to attracting the sort of investments  

that are needed for a clean energy transition. 
And that means modernizing the grid to improve  

its efficiency and flexibility. As such, the 
role of high utilities in this transformation  

is crucial. And so, this is another point that 
would go a long way into building this sort of  

efficiency and flexibility that is needed.
Efficiency and flexibility. Two words that  

we've heard before in this panel and I'm 
sure we're going to hear more of them  

during the whole BETD. Thank you for those opening 
statements, panelists. I would like to get into  

a first round of questions. The assessment of 
energy access and national policy solutions. I  

would like to ask you it keep your responses to 
these individualized questions to between 3 and  

4 minutes because we have a lot it get through 
today. And Aneri Pradhan, I would lake to start  

with you. How would you judge the overall state 
of energy access worldwide? And what role do  

you see for the private sector to advance S DG7?
So, first, I started working in the energy access  

sector about 15 years ago. And the statistic 
at that time was 1.2 billion people lack  

access to electricity. 15 years later, you're 
saying 1 billion. I heard another statistic that's  

749 million. Regardless, we still have a lot of 
work to do given that 15 years has passed and  

there have -- it's good that many millions have 
gotten access to electricity. But it's nowhere  

near where it should be. Especially for it to be 
the 2030 goal of universal modern energy access.
 

So, I want to highlight some of the solutions that 
the private sector brings that we really need to  

support and scale up. So, in New Energy Nexus' 
Indonesia program, we support a startup called  

sustainable solutions. Where they're providing 
thousands of solar home systems in a community  

that lacks access to electricity. And this 
is very much a community-driven effort.
 

Another startup in our portfolio, Power Solutions 
in our China program creates and manufactures  

offgrid solar products for rural populations. 
So, the technologies are out there. This is not  

a technical problem. It's a market problem. It's 
an access problem. It's a finance problem. It's a  

policy issue. It's all about scaling these 
types of solutions so that we can really, truly  

reach these modern targets. One area of the energy 
access sector where I would say is particularly  

behind is the clean cooking sector. There's about 
3 billion people still who lack modern access to  

fuels and cooking. And from a climate perspective, 
it's disastrous. From a human health perspective  

it's 4 million people are dying every year.
The private sector has not been adequately  

supported in this. There hasn't been enough 
financing and there hasn't been enough government  

action to truly allow some of these appropriate 
technologies to proliferate. So, that's where  

the private sector is really needed because those 
-- the few million that have received electricity  

in the past 15 years has primarily received 
those services through the private sector.
 

Thank you very much, Aneri Pradhan. Clean cooking 
is a huge issue, especially when it comes to ideas  

of gender equality as we move forward. I want to 
turn now to Minister Jorge Rivera Staff. Panama,  

70% in 1990 to near universal energy access in 
Panama. What policies and measures contributed  

to this development and what is the role 
of renewable energy in that regard?
 

Thank you. Actually right now we have around 5% of 
this universal access gap mostly in our Indigenous  

and mountain areas. And that's a key issue to 
develop the last mile. Because of the costs of  

that. But as the previous panelist has said, 
we right now have the technology. The -- the  

downgrading of the costs of the technologies 
mostly from solar panels give us a great  

opportunity to fulfill this gap. How? We 
have -- right now as I mentioned in the past  

in -- we have a national energy transition agenda. 
And the first strategy for this to develop is the  

universal access it involves. Not only that, 
but also the rural access and the role of the  

women there is central. The commitment from us 
to empower the community, mostly the women.
 

Actually, we have a pilot 
project to empower women as  

managers of these systems. We have 
developed this strategy and it is around six  

main axis. With the one is strategy plan, the 
legal regulatory framework reforms that we need to  

improve. We have the finance and innovation that 
we need to fulfill and to guarantee the resources  

to close the gap. The research and development and 
innovation process. And the community empowerment  

is not only about technology, it's about our 
business models and also about the involvement  

of the community. Those are big issues that we 
are presenting as part of the renewable. Because  

half of this gap that we have right now 
will be closed with a panel solars, with  

micro grids. But mini grids and individual 
systems. But also, the extension of the grid  

that we're going to close the gap from half of 
this -- of the gap as mentioned will come from  

renewables. Our grid is around 80% renewable in 
Panama. 75% -- 70% of hydro. And the rest of the  

10% of the renewable energy comes from wind 
and from solar and we continue to grow that.
 

So, we are committed that the renewable energy is 
going to be on the center of the closing the gap  

of the energy axis. For us, as we mentioned, 
the energy transition agenda is a political  

commitment with policy, regulatory framework. 
A adjustment. And for these people, the energy  

transition is coming from the 19th century finally 
to the 21st century. So, this is one of the key  

adjustments that we are doing in our whole 
political agenda. We're working the process  

of the presence of the governmental services 
that we provide to our people. Water, education,  

sanitation, et cetera. And the energy -- closing 
the energy gap is part of this endeavor.
 

Thank you very much, Minister Staff. That energy 
gap something I want to discuss with one of our  

panelists in the studio. Mr. Itefa, I want to talk 
about Ethiopia. It has renewable energy resources.  

And you have managed to achieve almost universal 
energy access in urban areas. It's still limited  

in rural areas. But it's expanding at a 
rapid pace? What opportunities led to this  

optimistic look and do you have more plans?
Yes. That's a appropriate question. To give an  

understanding, in Ethiopia we 
have about 100 million population.  

Most of them are in the rural area. So, as a 
nation, as a country, we are working towards this  

by 2070 to create 100% accessibility. Using 
without a source. At the beginning that's  

what I was saying is, what do we have? As a 
country, our main energy source is hydro power.  

Where we use that in terms of topography and 
reliability. That's where we are maximizing  

our effort. And the second is solar energy. What 
we were saying is the off-grid systems that we  

are getting to our people and the prosperity is 
using the solar system and the wind. These are  

our three critical issue of investment area. 
So far we have national discretion program  

that is mandated at our ministry level to devise 
our policy and geared towards the accessibility of  

the energy. What I would like to raise here is 
that we do have clean cooks source so that our  

poor mothers in the village will not spend more 
of their time in the forest to collect the wood  

that will remain green. Better to provide them 
energy-saving technologies that are available.  

That is also one of our good experiences we 
are doing. So, two critical issues we can  

see from Ethiopia. There's a long-term, we are 
developing our hydro power in such a way that is  

energy demand at the national level is okay. And 
then even we can collaborate Sudan, others. And  

in the short-term, we are helping 
our families in such a way that they  

are accessible to energy. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Cooperation with  

neighbors is an important theme for all of the 
sessions here at the BETD. I would like to turn  

now to Wanjira Mathai. With the question, how 
can we reach scale in the energy access sector  

in a sustainable and replicable way when solutions 
are di nature geography and context dent?
 

Well, they are. But as you heard from the 
minister from Ethiopia, it is entirely possible  

to make the necessary investments to make 
universal access available. I think we are all  

endowed with all manner of natural resources. 
And as a matter of fact for most of Africa,  

renewables are where we are. Africa's 
only responsible for such a small,  

minuscule 4% of global greenhouse gas emissions. 
Many are already, Kenya, for example, are at 80%  

renewable. We need to de-risk investments in our 
part of the world. Especially in the clean energy  

sector. Because the role of private investors in 
financing energy is crucial. But there are very  

high costs and sometimes uncertain energy 
policies and regulations make it extremely  

risky in perception for investors who are looking 
to commit. So, that's one clear one. Then,  

of course, financing projects to stimulate demand. 
This is a very interesting one. Because there's  

very little focus generally on generating demand. 
Making electricity as we had from the Minister in  

Ethiopia in rural areas. Largely unaffordable when 
we do not have the farms of solar, for example,  

available to enhance food security and 
reduce vulnerability to climate change.
 

Ensuring that the sort of energy grids are 
affordable, reliable across the different  

value chains that rely on them. So, providing the 
sort of affordable finance that will be coupled  

with technical assistance will also be crucial in 
creating the sort of energy demand that's needed.  

Because the uptake of energies is as important as 
the supply side of this. I mentioned already the  

idea of modernizing infrastructure. But there's 
also shifting investments away from fossil fuels  

and trying to begin to invest in some of 
the hydro and other alternatives instead  

of fossil fuels as we have seen in the past.
So, there's a lot of opportunities. I don't  

think it's limited. For Africa we definitely have 
multiple opportunities. And we also -- I just  

want to mention -- that how important it is for 
the region of Africa to focus on energy access,  

as mentioned. The gap is largest here. But also 
on eliminating poverty as part of the agenda for  

energy access. That has to be a priority for us.
Absolutely has to be a priority. Thank you so much  

for bringing that up. I would like to turn now to 
Ajay Mathur in the studio with me. The mission of  

the International Solar Alliance is every home, 
no matter how far away, will have a light at home.  

It's beautiful. I want to know how 
do you plan on achieving this goal?
 

At the end of the day, the major challenge 
to providing these resources is the lack of  

resources. Particularly financial resources. To 
be able to put up the supply systems. Generation  

supply systems -- transmission, et cetera. Why? 
When we talk to international financing agencies,  

they tell us that the economic risks, perceived 
risks through financing are too high. To us, this  

implies the need for risk management facilities. 
Whether it is guarantees. Whether it is the  

working capital, et cetera, that can be 
provided. So, that if there is a delay in  

payments that can be. In each country, there 
would be a risk mitigation that is needed.
 

That we believe is essential to draw 
it up. For example it's not adequate.  

You also need capacity building. Wanjira 
talked about the need for local development  

of people. I think Aneri also talked about the 
fact that you need to have startups. You need to  

have people that are competent in what they do. 
Certification of trainers and of the trainees.  

And then the ability to have business models 
which make sense in the local context.
 

So, this is a big menu of things. But 
starting with what we talked about earlier,  

the regulations, following up with risk mitigation 
facilities. Following up with capacity building  

are a mixture through which we can 
ensure that every home has a light.
 

This is fantastic. I also love that you bring 
up certification of trainers. It's gonna be a  

session that we'll have that will be the subject 
of a panel session that we have tomorrow. A really  

critical and important thing as you say as well, 
Aneri. I would like to turn now to you, Minister  

Reynosos. Access to electricity was around 55% 
in rural areas in 1990 in the Dominican Republic  

to almost 100% today. Now, what were some of 
the contributing factors that led to this?  

How did you achieve this critically 
and especially in rural areas?
 

Well, maybe we should say that one 
of the points, one of the things  

in which the political class of the 
Dominican Republic agree all together  

is to get the universal access of the 
population to the electricity service.  

All parties in the Dominican Republic 
have this conception. By that reason,  

during the 1990 when the electricity center was 
partially politicized, the government kept the  

transmission of electricity company and 
also the hydro electric electricity company.  

The government maintained it, expanse, growing, 
and all around the Dominican Republic geography.  

Covering more, including remote rural area. And 
that's a key point. Because that's allowed this  

community to connect easily to the electricity 
services. The second thing is that the government  

have succeeded in the policies. And the 
rural area of communities which have been  

introduced with some electricity service. We saw 
hydro electric, et cetera. They don't pay. They  

don't pay anything for the electricity services.
These -- the other thing that the Dominican  

government do is that they work by to 
get contribution for private sector.  

And especially for no organized -- not government 
organization. National or international.  

It's the case of the cooperation from Germany. 
They have been very helpful in helping  

communities to get electricity assets. And the 
government has these possibility mainly with the  

contribution with some mining company, private 
one. And some other electricity company too.
 

There are another things for me, very, very 
important is the funding. The Dominican government  

specializes, I say that, in special units 
dedicated to promote the rural electrification  

around all the Dominican geography. That is 
important because we are talking about the one  

professional body which had the different kind of 
specialties. Engineering, sociology, et cetera.  

A special body which is working by to get the 
universal access to the electricity services of  

owl Dominicans. And they are -- these are the 
key points or the key reasons why the access  

to the electricity of the Dominican Republic 
has been growing fast over the last years.
 

Thank you very much. Sounds like some really 
fascinating projects. Important projects that  

you have in the Dominican Republic. That's it 
for our first round of questions. I would like  

to start with our second round of questions. We 
have about -- use about half of our time so far.  

And I would like to start with you, Minister 
Itefa. How do you manage to coordinate offgrid  

measures at the management level? I know you 
spoke about some of the cooperation you do  

with the neighbors countries, but I'm 
interested in knowing on the national level.
 

Thank you very much, at the national level 
in Ethiopia we have a Federal system.  

So, there are regional governments who 
are operating to the district level.  

So, actually, they are more responsible for 
household delivers in the village and the  

rural area. How they can create accessibility 
to energy. There's one area that we work you  

were. Another is the solar in another possible 
way I have been doing. From national level,  

we do have structures that is leading the entire 
system from the Federal to the regional level.
 

For example, in the Minister of Water and 
Energy led by the ministry, that is clearly  

by one sector. Where we have the electricity 
program. They're responsible for development of  

the entire system. And the public utility is the 
one managing the system or the utility service.  

So, such kind of linkage is how we 
are working at the national level.
 

And two critical points is the tariff with 
Ethiopia, that is supported by the government  

in such a way that it is affordable. One of 
the critical situations is affordability.  

Can rural Ethiopias afford the cost of 
the power? No, they cannot do that. So,  

at the national level, the government is 
supplying and assisting the community of  

the people to use that possible way. That is 
one alternative. The second one really we are  

working up on is encouraging private sectors. In 
such a way they can get involved with NPP model,  

private-public partnership aspect in such a way we 
attract investors who can work with the government  

and then they can get payback accordingly 
or so. So, we have a good policy issue.  

The PPP can join the government of Ethiopia for 
any potential source from Europe, solar, wind.  

And they are available and wonderful 
for availability in Ethiopia.  

And that will create really a good linkage.
Just the last point I want to mention  

is at the national level when we are dealing with 
the cooperation with our neighbors countries,  

our aim is to come to prosperity together. 
From the energy sources we are developing.  

That is also how we are trying to 
link in the national level and the  

neighboring level. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Cooperation  

is quite important. Back you, Minister 
Reynosos. The Dominican Republic relies  

on fossil fuels for power generation. You passed 
legislation to increase renewables to 25% by 2025.  

Are you on track and how would you judge the 
outlook for renewable energy in your country.  

Please use your microphone. No worries.
Yes. The law was in 2007. 2007.  

By that time, if you remember, with the costs of 
the renewable energy were very, very expensive.  

And then the Dominican government did some special 
conditions by to attract investment in solar and  

wind energy mainly. The situation internationally 
had changed in the Dominican Republic too.  

And then now the introduction of 
renewable energy are growing fast.  

Especially in solar energy. And wind too. We 
are far from 25 or 30% of the energy service  

relying on renewable energy. But the investments 
are growing. We had -- with rural wind and solar,  

we had about 20% of the energy electricity 
servicing covered by renewable energy.  

But the government now are trying to promote 
more investment in renewable because in the  

country we had to import all the fuels to produce 
electricity. We don't have any fuels with results.  

Something like oil and gas. And coal. We had 
to buy an international market or our fuels.
 

And that seems very dangerous. And this is a 
very difficult situation for our country because  

especially in the situation in the international 
market for the fossil fuels. A country like  

the Dominican Republic, that it depends almost 
more than 80% of these fuels in the international  

market. Now they understand they had to grow in 
the introduction of renewable energy. Because  

our country has a very good level of -- and 
also, a modest but important level of wind too.  

And that means that we can increase the 
participation of these renewable primary energy  

in the potential electricity. But still it is very 
-- it's very -- it's a very difficult situation  

in this moment in the Dominican Republic.
I think you're absolutely right. This moment is  

a difficult situation I think for all of us on the 
globe. And it has been a wakeup call for so many  

of us that energy access, that energy security 
is also about -- it's one of the most fundamental  

issues that faces us today. 
Alongside climate change.
 

I agree with you. Some countries in my case, small 
ones, Iceland, without natural resource and fuel  

is in a vulnerable situation. It's very high if 
you include most of the countries in the world.
 

Absolutely. I want to go to Wanjira Mathai 
virtually. We talked about priorities,  

water, health and gender. What potential is 
there for synergies between the important  

topics? And which measures would you see fit?
Well, I think all of those issues have really  

been mentioned. I think that we could not 
possibly imagine for the African continent that  

renders them resilient to the biggest 
existential issue, climate change,  

without universal access to energy. It has 
got to be the focus of all our governments,  

all our priorities must be on ensuring that we 
can have a just energy transition. Because it is  

a priority for the continent to eliminate 
what is the most debilitating situation  

that renders them most vulnerable as we saw 
with the IPCC latest working group two report.  

That poverty is a crucial stumbling block 
for us. So, energy access across the board.
 

And as we have -- as we have heard, it 
is extremely important for us to work on  

issues of cost. Issues of reliability. Issues of 
effectiveness. And, of course, issues of finance.  

The truth of the matter is, for generations, we 
have been talking about these issues. But I don't  

know why we don't crack through. So, perhaps 
the biggest opportunity now is for solidarity.  

Solidarity with the most vulnerable. The Minister 
from the Dominican Republic has explained  

just how vulnerable the situation is.
What more is for the global system to  

move and invest in ways that secures everybody?
Wanjira Mathai with an important question that  

I think we need to be answering here at the 
BETD. And once everyone goes home and gets to  

work. Thank you for asking that question, Wanjira 
Mathai. Ajay Mathur, I would like to turn to you  

now. The private sector plays a vital role in the 
pro significance of clean energy, especially in  

rural areas. How does the ISA support these 
initiatives and companies in the field?
 

You're absolutely right. At the end 
of the day, scaling and replication  

occurs because your business models 
which make sense to the private sector.  

What can we do? As I said earlier, the single 
reason which draws the private sector is local  

reforms. So, policy reforms which give a place 
to the private sector to provide these services  

and charge prices that the communities are willing 
and able to pay is the first key intervention.  

The second intervention is how do you 
interest these private sector players?
 

Because at the end of the day, you need local 
developers to be part of it. These are the people  

who note communities. Who know the financial 
markets. And who can make a living out  

of providing these services and collecting 
moneys. They know -- do I need to put an AI?  

Should I hire one more person? If 
I need to replicate to a thousand,  

is it necessary for me to have a maintenance 
man on every one project or every five projects?  

Those are key issues which local people 
can answer. So, you need local people.
 

I think there was this discussion of how 
do you enable the private sector to invest?  

A key issue there lies in what are the kinds of 
interventions that are -- that the system allows?  

You know, for example, how deep is the market? 
Can you -- is it possible to convert to securitize  

future earnings? If it is, it becomes 
much easier to raise resources.  

If it isn't, then you need to create the kinds of 
funds that are needed from where they can borrow.
 

The long and the short of it is that there's no 
one size fits all. But at the end of the day,  

you do need a clear policy guidelines. You 
do need resources. And you do need people.
 

You need people, you need resources and one size, 
absolutely, does not fit all. That's why I want  

to turn now to Aneri Pradhan. decentralized energy 
solutions are going to play a role in the offgrid  

area where a one size fits all doesn't work. 
How does your initiative support the solutions?
 

Sure. New Energy Nexus is the world's largest 
climate and clean energy a set rater. We have  

funded and supported 400 startups, and in 
emerging markets, India, Nigeria, Indonesia,  

Thailand, and more. And energy is being large 
issues in these regions are a key focus for a lot  

of the startups that we support and accelerate. 
And the Nexus Uganda program in particular,  

actually one I founded, won an award in COP26 
for energy access innovation. Because in Uganda  

there are 10,000 community-based organizations 
that mostly are the rural areas. And started by  

community leaders. And New Energy Nexus Uganda 
provides skills training and support for these  

organizations to become energy access companies. 
And that effort has been very successful to date.  

They've invested in 154 community-based 
organizations. And provided access to 100,000  

people in rural Uganda. And one community-based 
organization in particular, RF Care, they --  

the way this works is they work in the highlands 
and received a small loan. It's only 2,000 USD  

from New Energy Nexus Uganda. Used that capital 
to invest in cook stoves, clean cook stoves. And  

was able to distribute 1800 stoves in one year and 
giving lots of jobs in their community. Especially  

for women to become sales agents. So, these are 
the types of models that New Energy Nexus really  

wants to support and scale up. And because we are 
in so many emerging markets, we see the linkages  

and can actually share best practices throughout 
these regions and supporting entrepreneurs.
 

Congratulations. That's amazing. I think sharing 
best practices and education is what it is  

all about. Being in dialogue with each 
other. This is what we do the way forward.  

Thank you so much. Now to wrap up our second 
round of questions to Minister Jorge Rivera Staff.  

I would like to ask what are the 
opportunities and challenges posed  

by reducing emissions and deforestation and 
forest deregulation to universal energy access?
 

Thank you, Jennifer. Actually, when we talk 
about emission reduction, we're talking about  

climate change. And we're talking about energy 
transition. And for us as we have mentioned,  

our energy transition agenda is established 
by two big and main references. One is the  

SDGs from the United Nations. The SDG7 2030. 
And our commitment to the Paris Agreement.  

In Panama, how do we link the universal 
access with the forestry degradation and the  

conservation? Here in Panama it's actually 
one of only three countries in the world  

that today can be certified as carbon negative. 
We absorb more carbon emissions than we produce.  

And we want to go further in that. And that's -- 
that's not only because our -- the relevant of our  

energy, electricity matrix, as I mentioned, around 
80% come from renewables. But also our forest  

coverage. And this forest cover is not only we 
are working on the conservation and how to protect  

that area, but also recover those areas.
The recent data that we have right now in  

the last months indicates that we are starting to 
recover it. One, two, 3% of the previous degraded  

areas of deforest. How do we link this to the 
universal access? Around 4% of the -- our energy  

matrix, not only electricity, energy matrix 
in the country, comes from the burning of wood  

to cook in this region as I mentioned. 
The mountain and Indigenous areas.
 

So, if we close the gap with the plan and the 
strategy that we have, we will also contribute  

to reduce the emissions from these around 4% of 
the wood burning. And the other specific goals  

that we have regarding the emissions in order to 
go ahead with our carbon negative status, is to  

reduce the emissions in the transportation from -- 
so, for that part of the energy transition agenda,  

it's national strategy for electric mobility. 
So, this is important as you have mentioned in  

the panel and the conversations. The synergies and 
importance of the coordination of the policies and  

the policies to be on a long-term approach.
So, that is why we're working hard with the  

environmental inventory here in Panama and our 
energy authority system. To close this gap and  

also in the process to contribute 
with our NDCs to the Paris Agreement.
 

Absolutely. Closing the gap and keeping it 
to 1.5 degrees warming in alignment with the  

Paris Agreement absolutely important 
also in this panel of energy access.
 

Ladies and gentlemen, on my panel, we have 
just a few minutes left. But before we go,  

I want to take a minute to get your -- your 
final statements. I'll ask you to keep your  

statements -- and I'm sorry -- to under a 
minute or so. Thank you so much. You have  

been such a spectacular panel today. I would 
like to start with you, Minister Reynosos.  

Oh, please use your mic.
I forgot.
 

No worries.
Because very short time  

I will say that it is very important, this kind 
of dialogue. Like this is a very good scenario.  

Second, talking about the energy access. 
Usually we see that from the society point  

of view in one country. But the situation now 
for different aspects is approaching to the  

access of the country to the energy. Not the 
people within one society is countries. Countries  

we have a problem with the fuels contributing 
to the problem to access. And some technology  

that you even need because the production or 
the technology for generation, for instance.  

Depends on some small group or 
company. We are the leaders.  

And they improve the natural innovation. 
And sometimes this innovation  

cannot be following with some of the small and 
poor countries that need to produce electricity in  

several -- in some countries.
I would like to think about the situation not  

only of some social group within one society. This 
situation or the access to the energy source from  

some small and poor country around the world.
Absolutely. Thank you for those final thoughts.  

I would like to turn to you now, 
Minister Itefa, for your final thoughts.
 

Thank you. Just to say two critical points. 
The earlier of our panelists was saying  

the people who are not getting energy globally 
is more than 1 billion. Can be 1.2, 1.3,  

whatever we say. If we want to have a solution 
of this population, it's a new open country.  

Especially where we have high potential of using 
the rural energy. Thing area needs to get focus.  

They have energy sources that we can use. The 
second one is investing on the energy supply. I  

think it's time for the globe to see alternative 
energy sources. Today we are been discussing in  

the BETD that the fossil energy sources are the 
problem in one way or another. So, what can we do?  

How can we get the alternative energy source? From 
Europe, from wind, from solar, whatever we name.
 

I think partners should give due consideration 
on this point. That is a general issue I raise.  

Final point is from Ethiopia really we 
have good experience that we can share.  

Assessing what we have. Our sources we do 
have at country level, at the national level.  

And the sharing among the globe. Especially in 
maintaining the availability of social energy.  

Unless we have the water, we don't have the 
hydro power. To develop the power, we need  

to protect our forests as one of the panelists 
was saying from Panama is one of the points.  

That our watersheds need to be treated, needs 
to be covered with plants. That we do have  

good initiative for the green legacy from our 
Prime Minister. Such that we are sustainable  

used. Those my final points.
Thank you, Minister Itefa. And now the two  

digital panelists with, starting off 
with Minister Jorge Rivera Staff.
 

Thank you. There will be no clean energy access 
without universal access to everyone. We expect  

to have a technology issues. But it's not the main 
issues that we have said in this panel. We could  

say about the energy resources is not the issue 
also. We could resume it in two things. Capacity  

building, political willingness, and the resource 
allocation for the priorities that we have. And we  

have to bring all of these together in a roadmap. 
A clear roadmap for all the countries to fulfill  

and to close the gap before the year 2030.
I think you've come up with a great slogan,  

a clear roadmap to close the 
gap. I would like to turn now to  

Wanjira Mathai for her final thoughts.
Thank you. And thank you for having the  

world resources institute here. Closing 
the energy access gap for Sub-Saharan  

African countries and many vulnerable countries 
like them will definitely require significant  

financial investment. That's where we have to 
start. And that's where the proof of the pudding  

will be. reliable, abundant and clean energy is 
definitely key to creating the sort of prosperous,  

sustainable and inclusive economies we need 
to build the sort of resilience against the  

greatest challenge of our time. So, with the 
high energy gap and plenty of renewable energy  

resources, Africa still remains the last frontier 
for transformation and transformative investments  

in this area. So, I will spend my time working 
and focusing on the investment, the greening of  

investments, particularly Chinese 
investments in influencing the trajectory  

of financing towards infrastructure. That's 
transmission, distribution, and storage.
 

Also, access initiatives, especially 
commercial and SMEs as we've heard.  

And not to forget: Clean cooking.
All wonderful points. Thank you so much for those  

final thoughts, Wanjira Mathai. Now back to the 
studio, Aneri Pradhan for your final thoughts.
 

I just want to echo Wanjira's comment on 
solidarity. That is truly the way forward. New  

Energy Nexus is on a mission to support 100,000 
clean energy startups globally. And two of our  

accelerators are backed by governments. 
I would invite the Ministers here today,  

if you are interested in creating 
clean energy innovation economies  

with local entrepreneurs powering and creating 
jobs, we would love to partner and see how we can  

use our curriculum to support and finance 
entrepreneurs in your countries. I would  

also like to invite any investors who 
are watching and any startups especially  

who are looking for access to funding and support 
to scale up to visit New Energy Nexus.com and  

learn how to tap into these resources out there.
Tapping into the resources that we have available  

or that will be coming up with in the 
future. All what the BETD is all about.  

For our final, final thoughts, our 
last panelist of the day, Ajay Mathur.
 

We have spent the last hour discussing the various 
kinds you have things that work. Very clearly,  

reforms work. But if I am a government function 
their, I make the reforms and no money flows.  

What do I do? Or if I am a trainer, I train 
people and there are no jobs. The other way  

round. I create jobs and there are no trained 
people. At the end of the day, each one of us here  

at the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue needs 
to be a jazz musician. Improvise and make music.
 

I absolutely love those final thoughts. Improvise 
and make music. I did promise my panelists that  

we weren't going to do any dancing. Gentlemen, 
ladies, if you would like to, please. No, but  

seriously, thank you all so much. This is such an 
incredibly important panel. I'm so happy that you  

all made the time in your very busy schedules to 
join us here in Berlin or digitally. Once again,  

I would like to thank my panelists, Dr. Habtamu 
Itefa, Jorge Rivera Staff, Dr. Antonio Reynosos,  

Dr. Mathur, International Solar Alliance, 
Aneri Pradhan, and lastly but, of course,  

not at least, Wanjira Mathai, Vice President and 
regional director if Africa, the World Resources  

Institute. This has been a fantastic way to yap 
up these session on day one of the BETD. I'm gonna  

go ahead and give you a round of applause. 
Thank you so much for participating.
    


