Digitisation is a key enabler for the energy 
transition. Due to the growing pressure from  

the International Community, declining costs, 
and new innovative digital technologies.  

From AI to blockchain to virtual power plants 
and aggregated community energy models,  

which digital solutions will be most crucial 
to create more resilience, more efficient,  

and more cost effective energy solutions? 
Welcome back, everyone. Welcome back to our online  

audience. Welcome back to all of those joining 
us in?person here in the Weltsaal. If you were  

listening to Jennifer's discussion right now with 
the Irish Environment Minister, then you will have  

heard him talking about the dance that's at 
the centre of the energy transition challenge.  

Namely a dance between renewable energy 
supply and demand. Between intermittent,  

variable renewable energy sources, and variable 
demand. And integrating those is a perennial topic  

here at the Berlin Energy Transition 
Dialogue because it is so challenging. 
 

And, of course, one of the reasons for that 
is that we are integrating renewable sources  

into an electricity grid that was built 
decades ago to handle fossil fuels. So  

that challenge has now become even more critical 
as countries and societies are winding down,  

bridging technologies like coal and gas. Now 
more than ever, as we've been hearing throughout  

the day. Maxemising renewables and minimising 
emissions while simultaneously maintaining system  

stability is absolutely dependent upon accurate 
forecasts of power generation, of net load,  

and that, of course, is where digitalisation 
comes in. Digitalisation as you just heard  

is our topic here. Grid developers and 
consumers are harnessing the capabilities  

of AI, algorithms to forecast both supply and 
demand and asset operations supported by digital  

technologies ranging from sensors and blockchain 
to the internet of things. In this panel,  

leaders from government and industry are going 
to tell us which technologies they consider most  

promising and what frameworks are needed to manage 
both risks and unlock benefits. And we've got an  

outstanding array of speakers with us. I'll keep 
the introductions brief in the interest of mime.  

Andrea Meza joins us online. You see her 
here if you're with us in the Weltsaal.  

On the screen. She is Minister of Environment 
and Energy for Costa Rica. Welcome. Great to have  

you with us. And it's a pleasure to welcome Jan 
Lipavsky. He is Minister of Foreign Affairs of the  

Czech Republic. Thank you for joining us. We are 
very pleased to welcome Dr. Alparslan Bayraktar,  

Deputy Minister of Energy and Natural Resources 
for Turkey. Wonderful that you can be here, sir.  

Seated here in the middle is Sandra Trittin. She 
is co?founder and CSO of the decentralised energy  

management start?up tiko Energy Solutions. And 
founder of the software company grid singularity,  

and co?founder of the blockchain organisation, 
Energy Web Foundation. Thank you for being here.  

Dear panellists, it would be great if we could 
just go right into our dialogue. I'm very happy  

if you can keep your answers concise, within 
three minutes or less, please, as we had agreed. 
 

So before I pose my first question, let me 
just very quickly bring in our first audience  

poll. And, again, dear audience members, you can 
vote either on #betd22 or with our digital tool.  

See a lot of you have already found it. What 
should be the highest priority in digitalising  

and modernising the energy sector? That was 
our question. And our answers are a digitally  

skilled population and professionals. Secure a 
sufficient and sustainable digital infrastructure.  

Transparent involvement of citizens and 
protection of fundamental digital rights.  

Or increasing energy access. 
So those are our choices and we're gonna  

come back and take another look. I see right 
now neck and neck between infrastructure and  

access. But we're gonna come back and 
look at the final result in a moment.  

Let me start by asking all of you to say a 
few words about which technologies and systems  

you're particularly excited about. Which 
digital solutions you think are most crucial  

to supporting a sustainable energy transition. 
And I'll begin right here, if I may. 
 

Thank you very much for this great conference. 
Thank you very much for inviting me. And my answer  

is very simple. And it goes to all technology 
and all systems that lies behind and that enables  

transmission network. This is the key for 
renewable sources to be integrated into a network,  

and for these resources and on 
the demand side of energy grid. 
 

So this is absolutely pivotal for us to work and 
create a reliable energy network. And the power of  

these technologies, and the way ?? how the grid 
can be controlled and understood. Recently the  

Ukraine has switched from the Russian?controlled 
energy grid to European. It was a project  

which was prepared for many years, but the 
current events, the horrible Putin wars, you know,  

pushed those to be done in days. Without those 
kinds of technologies, it couldn't be possible  

to do so. So for me the answer is very clear. 
On the other side, every kind of this technology  

opens an open space for hackers to have 
these opportunities to attack the network.  

The most sophisticated, the most vulnerable. 
Therefore, cybersecurity has to go hand?in?hand  

with that and we have to have also these backup 
plans. Without them it would be very vulnerable. 
 

Thank you very much. We're going to come 
back to hear a little bit more about what  

your company is doing in this area in just a 
moment. I'm going to jump ?? I'm going to take  

our policymakers first and our companies second. 
I'll jump over to minister Bayraktar if I may. 
 

Thank you very much. I want to say something about 
the conflict between Russia and Ukraine today.  

Showing a slight improvement. This is 
slightly good news I wanted to share with you.  

When I go back to your question. I'd like to 
approach it from a more macro perspective, the  

role of digitisation. And the greatest challenge 
of today's energy world is how we are going to  

have this energy transition, whether it's going to 
be turbulent or smooth, that all we have discussed  

during these panels throughout the day. 
And they're all indications, as of today, showing  

us that it will be a turbulent transition. We all 
are seeing high energy prices, commodity prices,  

supply chain disruptions in the market. And all 
these things actually started before Russian  

innovation on the Ukraine. So, I mean, the market 
already started one crisis after another that you  

were describing this morning. 
So the indication is, again, it will  

be a turbulent transition. And to have a smoother 
transition, what I believe that we need to talk,  

not only energy transition, but smart energy 
transition. And when I say "smart," I do mean  

responsive, rational, flexible, and 
digital energy transition. We need to be  

flexible enough and we need to realize the market 
realities. I mean, the energy transition will  

not be overnight. It will take some time to take 
us to this 1.5 celsius degrees target. So we need  

to be really rational, not emotional. That we 
are showing very emotional and ambitious talk,  

but in terms of action, unfortunately, we are 
really behind. And when it comes to digitalisation  

of energy systems like IT and energy is 
converging very heavily pretty recently. 
 

But still, we are really behind all 
these technological developments because  

the major concern right now, we have this security 
of supply. Now, everybody is considering the oil  

supply, gas supply, and eventually the electricity 
supply, and how we are going to have continuous  

and quality?based power supply to consumers. So 
I think the macro question is that how we can  

utilise the digital technologies into an energy 
system in a more Harmonised and smoother ways. 
 

We're going to dive deeper in our next 
round of responses. Let me go to Minister  

Meza to get her same response on the issue. 
Thank you. I will do the same. Take this broader  

approach coming from the government perspective. 
And it's a little bit ?? when we're talking about  

this digitalisisation and energy transition, and 
I think it's very important when we keep in mind,  

at least from the Costa Rican point of view, that 
we're talking about the three Ds, decarbonisation,  

digitalisation ?? changing the paradigm of how 
we are doing things in the energy part for sure.  

And this will require new legal frameworks. 
And I think new policies that will allow us to  

move towards that end. But I think it's very 
important that we keep in mind this three?D  

perspective. And, of course, when we talk about 
technologies, we ?? and coming from a developing  

country, I think it's very important also to 
consider the cost of these technologies. And  

that this transition should try to be an inclusive 
transition and a just transition. So this will be  

some of the elements coming from our perspective. 
This needs to be with ?? this systemic approach,  

what we want is to decarbonize our economies. Two, 
of course, technology. It's a good instrument, but  

we really need to take into account the rights 
of people, consumers will be taking part in  

all of these mechanisms, and, of course, 
coming from the part of the governments,  

we will need to develop good frameworks that will 
give good signals to the private sector that will  

enable innovation, but at the same time 
it will protect the rights of consumer. 
 

So how do we really develop a good 
legal framework and policy framework,  

considering all these needs? I will leave the 
there and continue my reflections later. 
 

Thank you very much. And indeed, we will come back 
especially to that initial topic you mentioned,  

governance, a little bit later on. But 
let me now get the point of view of our  

private sector representatives on the 
panel, starting with you, Ms. Trittin. 
 

Thank you. Just building on what has been said 
so far, with the private sector, the three Ds  

that were mentioned, the digitalisisation is what 
will bring everything together. And with that, you  

have different focus areas, right? On one side, 
it's like how do you connect everything that is  

in the distributed space out there, right? How do 
you bring solar panels, how do you bring storage,  

batteries, whatsoever together, how can you deal 
with it? And there the first part of technology or  

area of technology, I think which is important, is 
everything related to internet of energy and how  

you connect and interconnect all these assets. 
Then based on that, you can work with all  

the data. You can work with the assets.
You can derive value out of that. Might it be  

for more secure energy supply. Energy efficiency 
reasons. Creating the flexibility. What you  

mentioned at the beginning, bringing the volatile 
supply together with the demand that every one of  

us has every day and every evening at home. 
And here I think technologies like blockchain  

which Ana will for sure talk more about it. But 
also Artificial Intelligence, machine learning,  

they are all crucial technologies in that space. 
Thank you very much. Ana Trbovich, your thoughts  

on how what you're offering links up to 
what we've heard from the policymakers. 
 

Thank you. As usual, I'll agree with my 
co?entrepreneur in that the answer is all  

to the above. So save you the struggle of the 
poll as well, there is technology to meet all  

of those objectives. We do not have to choose. 
And one thing that I would add is democratize,  

which is inherent in the other three Ds, and I'm 
sure the policymakers would agree. Therefore,  

we need the IoT for connectivity. We need the 
Artificial Intelligence and machine learning  

to overcome the size data because that 
can also be a challenge. And to take  

advantage of that data to learn and to be more 
efficient and automate different processes.  

And then finally, what blockchain allows is a mix 
of security and decentralised interoperability.  

So, for example, if we had a 
decentralised energy asset registry  

in a certain region as there is a project 
currently in Australia, for example.  

Then an application like the one that is 
offering for our virtual power plant could  

much more easily be set up in that region. 
Or an application that we're building which  

is to allow energy communities, people to 
trade with each other locally and to consume  

more what is produced locally. That could also 
be implemented more and more easily. The one  

disagreement I have is respectfully with the 
colleague from the Czech Republic in that not  

everything is at the highest levels of the grid. 
Yes, transmission is critical, but actually if you  

make it easier for people to engage locally, to 
alleviate the strain from the grid, that will  

actually help you decrease the investment 
that is needed at the transmission level. 
 

And if you have advanced application the 
that are possible with technology today,  

you can also use local marketplaces to support the 
flexibility and the balancing of the grid level.  

And this is what technology offers today. 
And our hope only is that the current events,  

not just geopolitical, but the climate crisis, 
which is finally, you know, the number of people  

who are in denial are getting smaller. That this 
will accelerate the regulatory side of things.  

Because the technology is there. I think this 
is the main message that we have today. 
 

And I want to give Minister Lipavsky a chance to 
respond to that. I want to add a question of my  

own and perhaps you can speak to both points. 
The Czech Republic received the title recently  

of digital challenger and digitalisation already 
account for a larger share of GDP in your country,  

if my math is right, than the five biggest 
EU Member States. And the share in the Czech  

Republic is actually growing twice as fast. So 
I wonder if you could say a little bit about  

how you do see that playing out in the Czech 
energy system, in the shift to renewables,  

and then also, of course, feel free to 
speak to the point made by Ms. Trbovich. 
 

Yes, I will just shortly reply to you. So I was 
speaking about the whole energy grid of Europe.  

And we have to think about big business 
and industry as part of the energy grid.  

Which I don't see to be a possible solved by this 
localised solution in the big scale. That was  

my idea. I was looking at it from that ?? from 
top?down view, and you offered bottom?up view,  

which is very valuable, and I think at the end of 
the day it will meet in the middle. So both, both  

of these approaches are necessarily. And for the 
digitalisation. So we are an industrious country.  

We have many universities. Many foreign 
companies from U.S. and from other  

states have own branches in Czech development 
centres. So it definitely helps. 
 

But for us, since we do not ?? the landscape 
is not the best one for renewable resources,  

we are not spurring these initiatives. You have to 
have a certain environment. So this is something  

where we can do much that I would comment on that. 
So even though we are tech savvy for renewables,  

we need new input. 
Thank you very much.  

And Minister Bayraktar, Turkey is putting a high 
context of digitisation on its anniversary that  

will mark the 100th year of its Republic. 
Where you see special applications in the  

digital sector. What are your priorities there?
Thank you. To understand it better, what is the  

role of digitisation in the Turkey energy market, 
you need to know two things about our market.  

Energy demand in Turkey is growing. So we need 
to meet this growing demand. On the other hand,  

we rely heavily on imported resources, mainly 
gas, oil, and coal. So we need to meet this  

growing demand at the same time we are trying 
to reduce dependency. To be able to do that,  

we need energy efficiency. We have a very strong 
programme on that for 2023. And afterwards. And we  

have also a goal of utilization of our renewable 
resources. Solar, behind, hydro and others.  

So to add all of these to major pillars to deal 
with our existing problems and also our goals to  

decarbonize the Turkish economy, which President 
Erdogan announced pretty recently. In the year  

2053, Turkey will be a carbon?neutral economy. 
So in three decades' time, to reach that level,  

to add more renewables, more intermittent 
resources into our network, we need to have  

a digital solution, digital tools to be able 
to do that. We have to have a decentralised,  

distributed generation. Great potential in our 
country in terms of renewables, but very diverse,  

let's say, areas in terms of resources. 
And in terms of energy efficiency, which we  

announced our National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan including many different sectors building  

transportation, agriculture, industry, and 
energy. Again, we need digital solutions. We need  

demand?side management to be able to have more 
efficient energy consumption. So digitalisation is  

not a luxury or not just a trendy tool that 
everybody is following and Turkey is following,  

but it's a necessity for our country. 
But the main question, and I think we can discuss  

in the second round, that how we should introduce 
digital solution into energy systems without  

giving up on system security or reliability. 
Yeah, absolutely. And I do want to pick up very  

much on that point. Let me go over to 
Minister Meza if I may. Because, again,  

your country gets gold stars for being the Silicon 
Valley of Latin America, as it's sometimes called.  

You have a very knowledge?intensive economy that 
hosts 16 of the world's top 100 IT companies.  

So how are you building on all of that in 
your national decarbonisation plan? What  

digital technologies do you see us particularly 
promising within the Costa Rican framework? 
 

Thank you. And, again, coming from this broader 
perspective. Because I don't want to talk about  

only one particular technology. Because I think 
that there are many important technologies in  

the different areas. And what I would say is, 
again, technology and digitalisation are only  

a mean and not an end for something. And what 
we're trying to do, it's understanding ?? and I  

think it was one of the previous speakers that was 
saying this digitalisation will be one of these  

key components to achieve decarbonisation 
and to continue moving towards these ends. 
 

And what we are trying to do right now, 
it's generating this enabling condition.  

Bringing in the right signals. And in our case, as 
you know, we are producing electricity almost 99%  

comes from renewables. And, yes, we are dealing 
right now with this other part that we want to  

continue moving towards the decarbonisation of our 
whole energy matrix, which means at the end seeing  

that everything, especially the transport sector, 
will be using electricity. And this will also be  

having an increasing demand on generating more 
electricity, and we will be facing the same  

challenges of a stability and flexibility. But 
here is where a lot of these technologies and  

these different digitalisation that we 
see it would play a critical role. 
 

What are some of the big challenges that we're 
facing right now? And as I would say, we really  

need to see it and understand what would be the 
demands or the things that we need to elaborate  

on the regulatory part. Because we know that we 
will have more interaction with the consumers,  

and this is something that we really want 
to understand better. What are the risks,  

again, and what are the right elements that we 
need to cover coming from this legal framework and  

this policy framework? And this is some of the big 
challenges that ?? and some of the big questions  

that we are ?? we are asking ourselves. 
We want innovation. We want to continue  

bringing this innovation, but at the 
same time, we know that there are many  

rights of people and that we need to cover and 
there are some guarantees that we need to look for  

this balance. So we are really having these big 
questions right now inside of that government. 
 

And we're going to come back to those questions 
in just a moment. I wanted to give us a look  

shortly at the audience poll that we did which 
the audience sees as some of the priorities.  

By the way, dear audience, we'd love to 
hear your questions for our panellists.  

If you have a question for us, please do send it 
to us through our digital tool or through #betd22  

and we'll bring it into the discussion. 
Let me ask you, Sandra Trittin, as one of the  

biggest realtime smart grids in the world, what 
tiko is deploying in the way of innovation and  

where you think additional innovation is needed. 
Are there gaps in the picture at the moment where  

you would say, you know, we need further work in 
this area or that area to bring this forward? 
 

To probably it's a quick explanation. We're 
providing power plants mainly from the bottom up.  

In the residential and commercial sector. 
We are interconnecting everything which  

is in residential homes and belonging to 
the area of distributed energy resources.  

Boxes for cars, battery storage, solar inverters. 
We are providing services to the transmission grid  

through fast?frequency response, 
balancing group optimisation,  

different kinds of services. So the virtual power 
plant can act like a normal power plant. Just  

without the gap, let's say, that it 
cannot produce new electrons, right? 
 

But the idea is to align the demand better with 
the volatile production of the renewable energies.  

Now where is the gap? The gap is quite a lot 
at the moment in the policy area. So in the new  

regulations. Because not all the markets are open 
yet. Not even in Europe. Not worldwide. To allow  

these kinds of systems. And they will be crucial 
for the future to utilise all the assets that we  

are building anyway and that every one of us 
is building probably with solar rooftop, et  

cetera. But the policy just does not allow access 
to markets. This is one thing. The second thing  

is that at some point ?? and I'm building a 
bit on what Ana was saying also ?? there are  

local markets missing. So, for example, we could 
think about local flexibility markets. Not only  

on the transmission grid but also on the 
distribution grid level. There is no market at  

all. It's not just there is just policy missing, 
but there is a market mechanism at all missing. 
 

But it will be useful. And then the question on 
how does it interact with the transmission grid,  

right, over the different levels? So I think this 
is one thing. The second part which I think is  

also important is how can we create financial, 
let's say, stability for investments into  

that field? Because if you invest into energy 
efficiency or if you invest into flexibility,  

it's nothing that you can hold on, right? If 
you're building up a gas power station, you know,  

okay, I have to go through a certain process. 
It will be built. Then I have running time of  

probably 40 to 60 years. I can see it. I can see 
the electrons. If you're building a virtual power  

plant, it comes with 2,000 that you have to 
convince to join your business model, then you  

have to interconnect them and work also with these 
clients, right? Then you need to have the market  

access and then you can provide the service. 
This creates often the problem that investors  

are saying, well, it sounds nice, right, 
but it's a bit unsecure. It's a bit risky,  

so probably I better stick with my investment for 
the gas power station. There are many, many other  

examples out there. Also if you are thinking 
about the topic of energy communities, right?  

If you want to build up an energy community 
nowadays where you can do a peer?to?peer trading,  

which investor is really going to take the risk 
at the moment to say, I'm going to build that  

up? Because there are so many unsecure pieces in 
this system, but at one point we have to start. 
 

I see Minister Bayraktar 
wanting to weigh in here. 
 

I was just going to say now are gas power plants 
too risky. Whether we will find the gas or not. 
 

Thank you for weighing in on that. Let me go over 
to Ana Trbovich. Because, in fact, blockchain is a  

technology where there are a number of potential 
use cases in the technology sector, particularly  

right here in Berlin, lots of start?ups 
trying to be part of this. Are there also  

gaps, would you say, when you look at the 
overall picture, whether in innovation or in  

governance and investment structures? 
Normally, policy is technology agnostic.  

And I believe everyone in the room knows that. 
And this is how policymakers act. You do not  

perfect normally or forbid a certain technology 
to be used. However, policy is more to do  

how that technology is used. So what can you do 
?? what can you make happen with that technology?  

And this is why we do have a gap. We have a 
gap in that something is possible technically.  

Something that could have a significant 
impact. But the policy does not recognise  

that type of an operation on the market. 
And this is exactly what Sandra was also  

saying just earlier. So, for example, if you look 
at the perspective of how much you need to invest,  

that could also be zero, right? It all depends 
on how connected the energy assets are. Which is  

why you need this infrastructure. I mentioned 
one project which is a decentralised energy  

asset registry. Why is that important? Because 
each energy asset would have an ID and would  

be able to interact with different applications 
seamlessly, in that you would not need a manager,  

organizing, it would be as simple as using an 
app on your phone. And this is where we need to  

get to. It needs to be easy for us to connect. 
It needs to become a lot easier for people to  

invest in and install renewable assets. 
To me, I do not understand to this day why  

it is so difficult to do that. Why, you know, 
everyone ?? where it would not be very normal  

like you buy a fridge or whatever device you 
buy, you also buy a solar panel, a heat pump,  

whatever it is. At the moment, I know there is 
a skills shortage. That, you know, installation  

companies do not even have sales departments 
anymore because they have too much work.  

We also have a shortage of some of those 
renewables. The EU recently asked the heat  

pump producers to increase their production. 
So there are some gaps there as well. 
 

On the core infrastructure, there are 
some projects like the ones I mentioned  

where the governments could make a lot of 
progress with very limited investment. And  

one example that was given about energy 
communities is one where there is a very  

enabling legislation, for example, at the EU 
level. But when you come to the EU member level,  

then either they do not explain how the directive 
can be implemented in practise or they do allow  

its implementation, but in a very limited way. 
For example, you can set up an energy community.  

You can even do peer?to?peer trading, but you 
do not do this based on market conditions.  

You do not do this in a way that you can 
respond to it from a distribution operator with  

flexibility and balancing first at that level 
and then up the grid. You do it based on a  

pre?determined pricing scheme. And while it 
is good to encourage people to self?assume,  

it may also be countereffective if the market 
really wants you to support flexibility. And  

if that is a more productive way of use 
of that particular resource at that time.  

So certainly there are gaps. While there is 
technology to allow a much more optimal use  

of renewables. And also that would encourage 
individuals to invest more in renewables. 
 

And to really activate the citizen in this 
process, not to have the entire burden  

at the central government side. 
Thanks very much. Let me get the ?? our  

technical team to please show us the results of 
our audience poll, because I'd like to now talk,  

do a deeper dive on governance and what's needed 
in that area. So if we could see those results.  

Here they are. And what we see. We asked, what 
should be the highest priority in digitalising  

and modernising the energy sector? We see that 
55% of those who responded said, secure and  

efficient sustainable infrastructure. The next 
largest share, 20%, say increasing energy access.  

Then we have 18% saying adigit alley skilled 
profession. You, in fact, talked about a lack  

of staff in some cases, skills shortages. 
And finally, transparent involvement of  

citizens and protections of fundamental digital 
rights. That's just 6%. Which is interesting.  

Fairly low share. Concerned about that. 
Minister Lipavsky, you would like to comment? 
 

Yes, I think the last option is very connected 
to the first one. Fundamentally digital rights.  

And efficient, sustainable infrastructure cannot 
be created without these rights. And it comes to  

my question and my point I wanted to raise during 
this debate. We get a lot of data. We get a  

vast amount of data. Where do we store them? Under 
which conditions? Who will have access to them?  

How will this be regulated? This is a 
fundamental question for EU, for Europe.  

We have to be looking for these answers. Do we 
want to share them with our friends in the U.S.?  

Do we want to send them to China? Do we want 
to ?? how do we work this dataset? So this is  

something where I see a role of politicians 
to be actively answering those questions. 
 

And what's your answer to some of those questions? 
For example, there is a very ongoing controversial  

debate about whether Europe needs its own cloud. 
Yes, it is an ongoing debate, and I feel there  

is some progress in talks with the U.S. side. 
And this is ?? this is exactly the debate I'm  

pointing to. And yes, we have to find ways how 
to protect data in Europe. To have a control over  

them. But not to lose connection, to know?how, 
and know?how and ?? how to put it mildly.  

The minds of the rest of the democratic world. 
U.S., Japan, Taiwan, for example, Australia,  

you want to have them on board when we speak 
about digitalisation and creating new things. 
 

Let me ask everybody else to give their 
perspective on the poll results and also  

in general on the question of what you see as the 
most important prerequisites for policymakers to  

be setting when it comes to deployment of digital 
technology. I'll first take the policymakers and  

then I'll come to our business ?? our business 
representatives. Please, Minister Bayraktar. 
 

Thank you. I mean, when I see the result of the 
poll it shows also today's biggest concern about  

energy. You know, the security of supply. The 
efficiency problems and sustainability questions  

comes to everybody's mind. So this is kind of 
also affected, I belive, the current realities  

and concerns. When it comes to the role of ?? 
the right governance of the digital deployment,  

I think the most important challenge is the 
regulatory challenge. I agree with that. And  

as a former regulator, I can tell you a secret. 
I'm sure you know it, but the problem with the  

regulatory world is ?? and especially these new 
technologies ?? technologies or digitalisation  

that we need to somehow increase and train the 
regulator as well because we ?? they basically  

don't understand how the system works. 
And when they don't understand, the obvious  

reaction from them is just not to deploy 
anything because we all know very conventionally  

we do tariff regulation. We do licensing. Market 
entry and exit. These are tools as a regulator  

they use. I used to use. So the stakeholder 
management, regulators, policymakers,  

consumers. I mean, I was a little bit surprised 
and disappointed about the role of citizens that  

it seems like 6% is quite low. But I think the 
most important part is a consumer empowerment  

and the role of consumers to involve in this 
new digital world. New digital energy world. 
 

So we need to increase the awareness of the 
people. How are they gonna engage with the  

market activities. How they can play a different 
role in the market, in terms of consumers.  

But first and foremost, also, I would say that the 
right market design, we need a new market design  

for this digital energy world. To have that, 
we need to digitalise the system. We need to  

make the system intelligent or smart. And we need 
to protect the system. The cybersecurity that we  

all are referring to. So these are the key 
factors that we need to ?? we need to have. 
 

Just before you put your mic down, what 
would you say both as a former regulator  

and as a current policymaker to Sandra Trittin's 
remark that, in fact, there are technologies out  

there that can't be introduced to the market 
because the regulatory system isn't able,  

essentially, to conceive of them within the 
existing framework? Is that a problem you're  

aware of? Are regulators and policymakers ?? 
Well, we do aware of, but the problem is ?? I  

think you will all agree with me, 
these new technologies, digitalisation  

is continuously improving. It's not like the 
mature system that we are going to introduce. So  

we don't know. We are so insecure 
and we don't know how we are gonna  

implement the right policies, the right 
incentives, right legislation that it will  

allow us ?? we will avoid any stranded assets, 
stranded costs. Because eventually there will be  

new things coming into online. And this, I mean, 
that's, I think, the main problem, and I hope  

that we will learn more and we engage more 
with the relevant actors to introduce the right  

policies and set of regulations. 
And I saw Minister Meza nodding her  

head quite emphatically. So I'll go to you 
now for a comment on the same question. 
 

I totally echo what the Minister has said. I 
think, I mean, we are building a new market,  

and we are building a new way of managing the 
whole energy system. And this is why we don't have  

the answers right now. And we need to be 
very clear and aware of these aspects. But  

this is why it's so important that we really 
need to keep in mind what are the main goals  

of this? Because then we can really lose ourselves 
if we are not clear on why are we doing this?  

And these are the kinds of questions 
that as policymakers, we really need to  

have these in the centre of the things and the 
discussions. We are doing this because we want  

to decarbonise our economies. We are doing 
this because we want to have also a better  

system and a better economy for all the people. 
And this is also an inclusion aspect that I want  

to bring here. This is for the people. And that's 
why I was very surprised looking at the answers of  

the polls as well. And I was ?? I totally agree. 
I think it was the first minister who mentioned  

we will be generating and we will be having a lot 
of information from the consumers, that consumers  

will be their best interaction. And I think this 
is great. This is fantastic. But at the same time,  

what are we gonna do with all this 
information? How are we going to use it?  

Is everyone so clear that we will be having access 
to all of this information? So I think that this  

is about understanding this part, but I also ?? 
I'm very clear that ?? and coming and hearing the  

other panellists from the private sector, it's 
so clear that we also need to understand that  

everything is changing right now and that we need 
to cover the risk, send in the right signals, that  

we know that these technologies will allow us to 
achieve the main goals that we want to achieve. 
 

So it's a complex moment. And my main point 
here is not to lose the big objectives. Because  

nothing is clear right now. We are writing 
the future and it's so important to have  

clear goals coming from the policy part. Why are 
we doing this? Be asking ourselves all the time.  

Because otherwise just technology for technology, 
digitalisation for digitalisation can also become  

a very big risk and can leave a lot of people 
out of the system in we don't do this having the  

people, human being in the centre. And, of course, 
our environmental goals there very clear as part  

of all of these transitions. 
So let me now go to the two innovators  

on the panel. And certainly if you like, give us 
your response to what the ?? to the poll results  

and how you see them. But then I'd also like to 
you to talk about finding this balance between  

policy frameworks as enablers that allow the new 
?? the technologies that are available and future,  

not yet fully ?? fully optimised technologies 
to flow into the market. And at the same time  

address the risks that need to be dealt with. So 
finding that balance. But first, if you'd like,  

just tell us your brief response to the poll. 
So I only have two reactions to that.  

So one reaction was that for the secure 
infrastructure, for me, the key word in  

that question was the digital infrastructure. 
Which means on the different levels, like,  

if you're looking to the different levels of the 
energy system, I think the consumer, for example,  

has no understanding what it means to digitalise 
on the transmission grid level, right? 
 

You bring in more technology, you 
have more overview, data, et cetera.  

Where it becomes interesting. This is 
relating to the last point, the last question  

with the limited number of percentage, right? 
Where people said digital rights are let's say  

less important. I think what people have 
understood already is that, yes, for sure,  

we need to have some basic privacy rights, but 
on the side, to be honest, who cares about how  

much energy I consume every day? I mean, would 
you all be interested in seeing that? Or seeing  

my energy bill. If it's, like, 100 Euros up or 
down? I'm personally interested, right? Because I  

want to see how much I saved in comparison to last 
year. But, you know, if anyone sees it out there,  

I personally don't care too much. And I think 
it might be also a question of generation.  

This just as a thought. I'm not saying that 
I'm fully agreeing with that, but it's more  

my interpretation of the results. 
Then in terms of the policy,  

what the minister was just saying before. I think 
that's really a problem. Is the matter of speeds.  

Technology and especially in the digitalisation 
is developing so quick, whereas policymaking  

just takes time. And this difference in speeds 
creates quite some tension. I think we have all  

seen that in the country where we are at the 
moment, in Germany with the smart metering,  

where there was a good approach in bringing 
smart metering full?scale into the country.  

Whereas other technology providers, about 
or most of them are thinking, well, it's a  

good approach, but it's ten years old already. 
But it's normal, right? Because the thoughts of  

bringing policy into that system here in Germany 
have been made ten years ago to be at the point  

where by are at the moment. So I think the major 
challenge will be on how we align that speed?  

How can, I think, also policymakers help to 
find let's say some basic rules which are  

not preventing future further developments and 
increase in technology, right? And changes. 
 

Thank you. It's occurring to me as I look at the 
results, ladies and gentlemen, we can see the  

results still on our screen up here, that if we 
consider policymakers and regulators to be amongst  

the digital professionals, then that 16% share 
is, indeed, quite low. Because you're telling  

us very clearly that regulators and policymakers 
essentially need to be brought along in terms of  

their understanding. Please, minister Bayraktar. 
I was just going to say, yes, we do regulation,  

so we do something for five 
years later, ten years later, and  

maybe we do have a right to make some mistakes, 
but eventually if you are ?? I mean, what you're  

seeing today, I mean, people are complaining 
and criticising policymakers or regulators  

to rely on one single country or one single 
source of energy. That creates a lot of  

problem in terms of security of supply. 
We might have that kind of difficulties  

and challenges in the future, in terms of 
digitalisation of energy. You can consider,  

like, we can rely on one single 
software ten years from now on. 
 

Can I just comment quickly? I fully agree with 
your perspective. I see the challenges. This  

is more looking from an entrepreneurship point of 
view. We always said, like, we want to build up a  

solution which can live without the policy having 
to change, right? Something which can support  

let's say the implementation, increased speed, 
but in the end, let's say start?ups have to live  

with the stages, at least how it is today, right? 
You cannot build your future business on something  

that there might be a change in policy. I can give 
you an example. I'm waiting since ten years that  

the Swiss energy market will be liberalised. And 
I think I will wait probably another ten, right? 
 

But that's fine. That's just how the world is. 
Still, tiko is still alive. We have created  

our own business model. In that case it worked 
out. There might be other cases it doesn't. 
 

Thank you very much. I want to go to Ana 
Trbovich because I wanted to get your take  

also on the poll result. Then I have a 
question as well about security to you. 
 

Thank you. I will perhaps turn to energy 
access, because in my work I actually see  

an intersection that some may not, which is 
one with transparent citizen involvement.  

Energy access is a basic right to have literally 
access to energy. Usually translates to access  

to the grid. Because we still have a significant 
portion of the globe with no access to the grid.  

And what happens in these communities 
that do have some access through  

solar or home management systems while 
others end up paying more for less.  

Because of the situation. And also in part 
because the electricity comes from the grid  

often in those exact regions tends to be heavily 
subsidised and not reflective of the real price. 
 

So we have a disconnect where future 
solutions are developing and can develop  

to allow those communities to function 
off the grid in a more optimal way.  

But as soon as the community connects with 
the grid, they no longer want this solution.  

Which helps relieve congestion from the grid 
because the electricity from the grid is  

cheaper. So there is also a disconnect there. 
Then in contrast to such communities, we have  

communities in very advanced economies where 
people get together for energy access because  

they want to be off the grid. Because they want to 
be self?sufficient. Because they can. Because they  

have the resources. They usually are experts 
themselves. They can afford to buy the most  

advanced technology batteries to store. Everything 
to be off the grid and are proud to be off the  

grid and self?sufficient and not dependent. And 
in the long term, they end up doing much better,  

right? Because they don't get charged every month 
and so forth. So gene we have a disconnect between  

who needs to be supported and who 
ends up having a better deal. 
 

And this is what needs to align. And to end 
on a positive note, as always an optimist,  

we are going in a good direction. Every single 
policymaker that I have met who has become  

educated, like you said, about blockchain, for 
example, falls in love with the technology because  

it adds transparency. Because it adds security. 
Because it adds efficiency. And because it goes  

very nicely with other technologies like AI and 
IoT. And it's always a hybrid solution. But we do  

need to increase education. 
There are also  

what are called regulatory testbeds, right? 
Which are places where you can safely innovate.  

And there are many pilots around the world 
that have implemented solutions. Then there is  

a waiting room, right? When do you decide and 
what do you need to decide to move from that pilot  

and that regulatory testbed to mainstream? This 
is where we get a little frustrated as innovators.  

Because like Sandra said, we adapt our technology 
to what is possible in terms of regulation,  

but we know we could do a lot 
more if we were allowed to. 
 

And this is where we need to continue to talk and 
have this dialogue, and that's why today has an  

important role and that's why we're both here. 
Thank you very much. I'd like to just briefly  

pick up on the point here about secure and 
efficient sustainable digital infrastructure.  

I'm not ?? infrastructure ?? I'm not sure if 
it was you, Minister Lipavsky or you, Minister  

Bayraktar. The concern about the security of our 
systems' critical infrastructure, particularly  

in view of potential cyber attacks. So just 
briefly to you, Ana Trbovich. Because blockchain  

is often conceived of as a particularly 
secure technology. In general, not only  

with regard to blockchain, but how secure is our 
digital infrastructure? How vulnerable is it? 
 

Okay. Maybe let's go back to this cloud.  

Blockchain is more secure because it is very 
difficult to hamper with the blockchain based  

solution and to manipulate the data that is 
there and a set of transactions that follow  

a certain path which is usually called a smart 
contract. But essentially it means how are  

things done? What is the process? You know, what 
steps are followed and what happens as a result?  

What is always vulnerable is the input. Right? 
So if your input comes from a digital system,  

a battery that is generating a certain output at 
a certain time and you're taking that as input,  

that is more secure than someone ?? a person 
copying from an Excel sheet or telling you  

that's what the numbers are, right? So 
you can decrease the vulnerability input,  

but there is always that vulnerability at 
the beginning, which cannot be prevented. 
 

One example of many cases that already work are 
these renewable energy certificates where instead  

of having sets of people having to verify, yes, 
this is a hydroplant. Yes, we can see this is what  

they produced in the Excel sheet. Instead, you are 
just stamping minute by minute or second by second  

through whatever system you have there. You avoid 
cheating, which happens in the system with double  

certificates. You can arrange for contracts 
in advance to purchase. That's one use case. 
 

Another use case is if a battery 
in your car has a digital ID,  

then you are not in the closed system where only 
the owner or the car manufacturer can decide  

who has access to the data from your car, from 
your battery and use that for their own purpose  

and give you a product based on 
that, but you can choose among other  

providers and use your battery not just for your 
car, but also to sell back at a certain time  

and provide a vehicle?to?grid service. 
Simply, you have this interoperability that  

becomes more secure because you have this digital 
ID. Many countries have digital IDs for citizens.  

The digital ID for energy assets follows a 
similar system, but we now have a technology  

to do it in a more secure way. And let's 
say that everybody has a digital ID,  

every asset does, that also allows you the 
possibility for everybody to keep their data  

and exchange what is needed for a certain service 
to work. Just like, again, we select apps and  

what we allow an app to do on our phone. This also 
prevents one cloud storing all of the information  

because everybody can store theirs and exchange 
what is required to that particular use case. 
 

So this is just to spark your curiosity 
about an alternative to one cloud. 
 

Thank you very much. And just very 
briefly, we have about 2 1/2 minutes left,  

and I would like to just ask all of you. 
Because a central theme of this conference  

is cooperation and how cooperation can take 
us forward in the energy transition. So put  

that together, if you would, with digital 
and tell me, what would be the key priority,  

in your view, moving forward where cooperation 
is important or essential? Minister Lipavsky. 
 

Yes, we need to be working on European common 
solution. That is absolutely clear. We have to do  

it in a matter of energy security. We have to do 
it in the area of digitalisation and regulation.  

And that basically would be my answer to that 
question. So common regulatory framework which  

would allow for these technologies to thrive. 
Thank you very much. Minister Bayraktar. 
 

To me, we can co?operate on the change management. 
Because the main question here is how are we gonna  

be able to successfully manage this change, big 
changes happening in the world of energy? The  

distribution of utilities is happening right 
now. Some colleague mentioned already the speed  

of change is enormous. So how are we gonna 
let's say manage this change of speed? So  

we need to co?operate on that front. Also, 
very important things on cybersecurity. Again,  

another cooperation area we all share. And 
also we can learn from different sectors.  

It's not only energy, but banking sector, 
telecommunication. They're already having these  

just questions. And one less thing to the private 
sectors, to innovators, to try to be more simple,  

to simplify things for consumers, becoming more 
consumer friendly and for also policymakers and  

regulators would be really nice. 
Thank you so much. Minister Meza. 
 

I will say that we need to continue this 
collaboration with, well, these dialogues  

with the private sector and I totally agree 
with the Minister. It's very important that we  

continue having these conversations between 
all of these innovators and the policymakers.  

This is very important. Continue piloting. There 
is ?? I know that they don't know we want to  

scale up things, but we're still in the phase 
where we need to continue doing some piloting.  

And, of course, this cooperation between 
developing countries and developed countries,  

it would be crucial, again, because we are 
all facing a lot of these challenges. And,  

again, it's very important that we leave 
no one behind in this transition. 
 

Thank you so much. Sandra Trittin. 
The word being cooperation to the people  

attending here on that panel, I think what's just 
been mentioned, keeping the continuous exchange.  

Also the speed of exchange I think has to 
increase because we are talking about technology  

which is quickly changing. It's crucial. 
And then I think also what has been just  

mentioned from the Minister before, 
that on one side, we can still pilot,  

but also how can we help to secure policymakers to 
go to the next level to make it a possibility for  

mass market applications? So not only to learn 
and to exchange knowledge from both sides, but  

also how can we support in a day?to?day business 
each other on how to move forward more quickly? 
 

Thank you so much. Ana Trbovich. 
I believe I have already concluded in a way,  

so I can only reiterate that we will always 
be back and find time to talk. And you should  

also meet your entrepreneurs in your countries and 
listen to them and try to create these goal posts,  

you know? How much evidence do you need to move 
forward with the policy? Maybe leave that as  

the final note. And one example, we actually had 
a hack?a?thon with a young Turkish entrepreneur  

who involved students from university last week 
to start that bug early, to make them think out  

of the books. Like you said, thinking about 
a completely new market design. Because it  

is not the technology that has disrupted the 
market. The market is already disrupted. And  

we need to use this technology to better manage 
the market that is distributed and disrupted. 
 

Thank you so much to all of you. It's been 
a very lively and interesting discussion.  

We appreciate it very much. Let's 
give them a nice round of applause.


