The war against ukraine has spotlighted 
the geopolitics of fossil fuel dependence.  

The energy transition towards 
renewables and green hydrogen  

offers an opportunity to reduce 
dependence on unreliable or volatile  

suppliers. It simultaneously creats new 
interdependencies and power relations. 
 

In this panel we want to look 
at the two sets of risks,  

those posed by climate change itself and those 
sparked by the shifting geopolitics of energy.
 

And welcome back everybody, great to have you 
with us on this session of the Enengiewende  

on peace and security. And, as we just heard, in 
our short film there, indeed, the Russian invasion  

of Ukraine has spotlighted the urgency of overcome 
dependence on fossil fuels as never before. In the  

next hour, we want to take a deeper dive on the 
shifting geopolitics of energy, asking whether the  

Enengiewende stabilises global energy systems, 
and reduces geopolitical risks or create new  

interdependencies, and we touched on that in our 
green sofa debate with the heads of IEA and IRENA  

or create new interdependencies that could end 
up outweighing the benefits of cutting back on  

fossil fuels. Those are a couple of the questions 
we will address with an outstanding panel.  

We are waiting for one member of the panel, but I 
will go ahead and introduce our other panellists  

and do a brief audience poll hopefully buying a 
little bit of time for our fourth panellist here.  

Welcome to Professor Roberto Cingolani, 
Italy's Minister of economic transmission,  

was also Chief Technology and Innovation Officer 
of the Italian aerospace company, Elonardo. Great  

to have you with us, minister. We are also very 
pleased to welcome with us joining us remotely,  

Adam Guibourg -Czetwertynski, hoping I more 
or correctly pronounced that. He is the former  

chief negotiator of the Polish presidency of 
COP24 after which he headed the environmental  

department at the permanent representative of the 
Republic of Poland to the EU. It is also a great  

pleasure to welcome a woman who was mentioned 
with great enthusiasm in our opening ceremony,  

Jennifer Morgan, recently appointed State 
Secretary and Special Envoy for Climate Action  

at Germany's Federal Foreign Office, a former 
Member of the Scientific Advisory Board of the  

Potsdam Institute - and the former Executive 
Director of Greenpeace International. It's  

great to see you again and wonderful to have 
you on this panel. We were waiting for a fourth  

panellist. I will introduce him when he arrives. 
And, ladies and gentlemen, what I would like to do  

while we are waiting for his arrival is a 
very brief survey of the audience, again,  

this is one that you can take part in either at 
#betd22, or by using our digital tool. You can see  

the question hopefully right now on your screen. 
It is this: from a security perspective how  

would you judge the Enengiewende? It will 
make the world safer? Make the world less  

safe. Or the effects will cancel each other 
out. It is 100% going in one direction. We will  

take another look at this in just a moment. I will 
get the take of those who are with us now on how  

you see exactly that question, whether you think 
that the current crisis will accelerate the shift  

out of fossil fuels and into green energy and 
that that will make the global energy system  

more stable, or that we're going to be replacing 
one set of vulnerabilities with another one. 
 

The present crisis will accelerate the 
transformation. I would have answered the question  

it will make the world cleaner, not safer. I think 
safety doesn't depend primarily on energy, but the  

attitude of humans. The situation we are 
facing now is of course forcing our countries  

to accelerate in towards renewable energies. In 
Italy, we are trying to keep the road map to -55%  

carbonisation exactly as it was before the war, 
in that we are replacing, we will replace the gas  

that is currently imported by Russia in exactly 
the same amount, or possibly slightly less,  

because in the meantime, we are accelerating 
renewable installations, we are accelerating  

the energy-saving programme, so in, let's say 
in a few years, hoping the war will finish as  

soon as possible. The real challenge is not 
2030, the road map up to there is clear.  

The real challenge is after 2030, and I think we 
need a completely different energy landscape for  

the second and third decade. Right now, I don't 
think energy-intensive countries such as Germany  

or Italy can make it only with renewables, and 
having a little bit of gas for programmability.  

This requires some deep thought. 
Thank you very much. State Secretary  

Morgan, can I get your take on 
the same question, if you would? 
 

I think that the energy transformation, 
the Enengiewende, in the middle of this  

horrible war, I think it is will come together, 
and has to come together to create more stability,  

but it will be disruptive. I mean, we 
are seeing how disruptive dependency on  

right now Russian fossil fuels is, and we are 
seeing how disruptive the dependency on all  

fossil fuels is through climate impacts that are 
happening around the world that are making us much  

less safe. So I think - and there are a myriad 
of examples there that are front and centre.  

So I think the key, though, is right now, in the 
short-term, to be accelerating that transition  

as both ministers spoke about this morning, into 
renewables and energy efficiency to be looking at  

for Germany how to fill the gap, and fill the 
gap that in a way from Russian oil and gas,  

that doesn't mean that it gets filled at the same 
amount from our suppliers, in other words, we must  

take that step to really remove our dependency 
on all fossil fuels as soon as possible. Does  

that mean there will be other security or 
stability issues that come forward? Yes.  

Do we have to tackle that? Do we have to 
address that and figure out how to do that?  

We can do that, and we are doing a lot of work 
here at the foreign ministry to do that. 
 

We will come back to that a little 
bit later. Let me now welcome our  

fourth member of the panel. It is a great 
pleasure to welcome Yaroslav Demchenkov.  

He is Ukraine's Deputy Minister of Energy.  

He is also deputy Minister of 
Energy for European Integration,  

in a career that has included high-level 
positions with the UN development and World Bank,  

long experience with international projects in 
energy, green economy, and infrastructure. And,  

sir, I would like like to ask the Polish 
Under Secretary of State if you could  

defer from answering the question we posed and 
we will go straight to the Deputy Minister from  

Ukraine, to basically get your assessment of the 
current security balance as it links to energy? 
 

Thank you so much. I do really appreciate 
to be here. Thank you for this opportunity.  

Our country's already in the second 
month of Russian's invasion into Ukraine,  

and after five weeks of our war against, or 
for this war against originally Ukrainians,  

against humanity, freedom, and democracy, I 
want to stress that Putin has a specific plan  

to destroy Ukraine's energy infrastructure 
and Putin avoided shelling around our gas  

transportation system to Europe so that he 
has a plan after taking control over Ukraine,  

to use our energy system to continue bargaining 
and trading with Europe, and keeping it hooked  

on the needle of energy dependence. It is 
an attack on the unity and future of Europe  

and its nations. Panic on the Europe's energy 
market is playing a vital role of Russia, because  

this panic fits right into Putin's very cynical 
and grieve strategy. The current panic is granted  

in a belief that Europe has no future without 
Russian energy sources. Russia continues to  

use politicians and lobbyists on its payroll 
to create a fear using the European community  

that the green transition is dead end, and that 
now you should increase the level of fossil fuel,  

and especially Russian gas. Europe should 
meet this challenge with dignity and resolve.  

We should ensure our energy security 
and not divide from planet green course,  

and the world, and the current energy crisis 
should be a turning point for Europe in ending  

Russian's energy blackmail and achieving global 
decarbonisation goals. Decarbonisation goals. I'm  

confident that this topic for all us, and 
I'm confident that this sad and tragic  

event in our country should change the current 
energy security balance with the main direction  

firstly. Destroyed completely the Russian belief 
that Europe could not survive without Russian  

energy. Secondly, stop financial flows to Russia. 
Russians get more profits selling fossil fuel.  

We should stop this. We should review plans 
for the use of gas as a transitional fuel,  

taking diversification and energy security 
into account, and last but not least:  

invest in balancing capacity, including storage to 
enable more use of renewables. Commercialisation  

of other technology, in the long run, they 
will guarantee energy independence and  

efficient contribution to the goal, effectively 
contribution to the goal of our Paris Agreement. 
 

Thank you very much. May I just ask you a 
very brief follow-up question, and that would  

be whether, as a result of the war, you have a 
different perspective now on nuclear energy? 
 

Yes. Just recently, we had a meeting and we 
discussed this issue for nuclear energy. In  

this case, we see that Russia occupied and 
captured the biggest in Europe nuclear power  

plant in the region, and we see that Russia 
really demonstrated - it is difficult to say  

unfriendly, very aggressive activities, 
and this is an act of nuclear terrorism.  

We see that Russia has shown completely disregard 
to the key pillars that ensure the development of  

nuclear energy, namely, safety, security, 
and safeguards. So that is why our society,  

Europe, the United States, and all countries, 
should demonstrate Russia very active  

positions, and, first of all, we 
believe that it is necessary to limit  

the ability of Russia to implement new projects 
for the construction of nuclear facilities  

outside Russia, especially here in Europe. 
In spring 2020, evidence was provided of  

actual contracts for the complete, or partial 
construction of just 25 reactors, and this is a  

huge amount of funds. A total volume around US$100 
billion. We should stop this and provide sanctions  

on the whole group, we should limit the ability 
of Russia to provide their influence, Russians  

to provide their influence on UN agencies, 
such as International Atomic Agency, and these  

agencies should be more active and tell the people 
really the threat regarding the threat of Russian  

nuclear facilities. Dirty bomb: this is not a 
myth. It could be really. This is really a big  

threat for all Europe, for Ukraine, Russia, 
and Belarus, and we should, because of this,  

we should stop Putin immediately, because each 
hour costs for our country a fortune - not just  

only because the destruction of infrastructure, 
but each hour Putin is killing our civilians,  

our people, children, you see a lot of refugees 
in your country. More refugees could be here if  

we do not stop Putin, not just only from 
Ukraine - here, he tried to destroy our  

revenues, storages for diesel fuel, because of 
his plan also to stop agricultural activities,  

stop pumping in this period of time, where 
it is very important. If we will not do this,  

we will have a lot of refugees, not just from 
Ukraine, but a lot from Africa, other countries,  

because they will not have enough food. 
This is a criminal war. This is terrorism,  

and this is really active activities against 
humanity, against civilisation, against our  

green transition, and our future 
world and really we are close  

to the Third World war. She should stop 
this immediately, stop him immediately. 
 

You mentioned refugees. Let's go now to the 
European union member state that has taken  

in the most refugees, so far, namely Poland, 
under and Secretary Adam Guibourg -Czetwertynski  

is with us. Your take on the current 
security balance as it relates to energy. 
 

First of all, I think it is very 
delegate to take the floor of a Yaroslav  

who gave us a very ... testimony of the dramatic 
events that are taking place currently in Ukraine,  

and it may seem a bit detached from reality to 
be talking about long-term objectives when you  

are a nation that is being bombed daily, that 
is fighting for our freedom, and our democracy,  

and, you know, you mentioned the number 
of refugees that Poland is taking. I mean,  

we are doing this, and we are doing other things 
to support Ukraine, and we will do everything we  

can to continue to support Ukraine, but I 
think it is really not much in comparison  

with what could happen if we don't take 
the necessary steps we need to take now to  

stop Putin. And, in answering to your previous 
questions on nuclear, I think we should not mix  

the risk. The risk is coming from the war. The 
risk is coming from Putin attacking Ukraine,  

and it is not only a problem of this civilian 
infrastructure, it is a problem of many different  

infrastructures, and to use civilian targets in 
a war is just criminal, and it is not something  

that we should accept, and we should actually 
condemn it as the international community,  

not only those entrepreneurs mentioned - I don't 
want to entrepreneurs mentioned, I don't want  

to make the list of civilian infrastructures, but 
definitely using these civilian objectives for war  

purposes is not something that is acceptable. Now, 
coming to your question about energy security,  

I think in this energy-transition 
period, we are indeed in a more difficult  

time, because, in a sense, we are combining 
the risks associated with the old energy  

system - we're trying to get rid of, you 
know, the volatility of the prices in the  

fossil fuels, the fuels, and the geopolitical 
risks, now naturalised with the war, and with  

all the risk associated with the new system, the 
same type of stability of the energy system, and,  

you know, the connection with the weather, for 
instance, for renewables, so we are combining  

all the risks together. So in this sense, the 
current transition is definitely a more difficult  

challenges, but the long-term objective of 
becoming climate-neutral by 2050 for the EU,  

and getting rid for of fossil fuels, is that 
absolutely aligned with our new-found world to get  

rid of Russian fossil fuels as soon as possible. 
So I think in the long-term, these objectives are  

perfectly well aligned; the challenge is 
really in the short-term how do we find  

a new path that allows us to get to the same us to 
get to the same final objective without relying on  

imports Russian fossil fuels? That is the 
big challenge that we are facing now. 
 

Let's drill deeper now on precisely that 
challenge on the timing and transition  

risks that all of you have mentioned in part. 
Yaroslav Demchenkov, your minister in Germany has  

called for the end of fossil fuels in Germany, 
working tirelessly to bring them down,  

already got natural gas down from a 55% share of 
Germany's overall natural gas imports to 40 - that  

is in five weeks. That is quite astonishing. How 
can we accomplish such a major shift short-term? 
 

We are advocating the smart approach that 
should not harm the European energy security,  

but the same time can be harmful for Russian 
energy policy, and significant limits,  

their possibility to manipulate the 
markets, first of all. And, for instance,  

Europe can easily refuse from Russian LNG which 
will not have a great impact on their EU economy  

because it is only 9% of consumption, but it will 
give a powerful signal to Russians and to markets,  

and it will have a significant sociological 
effect for society. This task may not sound  

feasible, but it is. Concluding the transit 
contract with R - forcing the Russians to  

compete with the third energy package, or 
stopping in order stream Nord Stream 2 didn't  

sound real, either, but also it shows they 
were against a sovereign European country in  

the 21st Century was real, but did we? And we can 
understand the arguments you make here, including  

the fear, and ... so we see a lot of messages 
everywhere that it is quite difficult for us  

not to use Russian energy, not to use, but we see 
a lot of opportunities, for example, our country  

can propose storage, gas storage. We could have 
a lot of co-operation in this field. Sometimes,  

some types of actual is easily replaceable 
now, and we should take this into account,  

and we see that some European businesses, 
even now, stop using Russians fossil fuels,  

such as coal, oil, LNG, and other, and this is 
good message for governments to do the same,  

and we are waiting from our European partners 
that they will stop using Russian fossil fuels,  

and this is very important message. I would like 
only to use this opportunity to pay more attention  

on the future. We should pay more attention on 
green hydrogen, and green technology, and use them  

as soon as possible. And also implement energy 
efficiently. This is also very important approach,  

because we could reduce the consumption of gas and 
oil, and definitely this could give a significant  

message to markets, relocated their 
approach, and to have different approaches. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me go to Germany, 
and then to Italy to talk a little bit  

about diversification, because, in fact, 
your two countries are more dependent on  

Russian gas than many other EU member 
states. As I mentioned, you're working  

towards short-term diversification. What are 
your main priorities, and what trade-offs can ...  

potentially, politically, supply for another? 
Well, I think first of all, our top priority is to  

stop the war, and find ways as quickly as possible 
in an emergency way to have peace. And to do that,  

in every single way that we can, I will 
come to the energy question, but also,  

obviously, to support you, and your incredible 
country, people in what you're going through.  

[Applause]. And for us it is a small thing 
to know what you're going through right now.  

Obviously, this is an incredibly challenging 
situation, and I think Germany and ministers  

Habeck and Baerback with working hard 
to end our dependency on Russian fuel,  

coal, and gas, as quickly as possible, and I 
recognise that is not necessarily fast enough,  

but I can assure you that we are 
trying to do everything that we can to  

make that happen, and I will come to the question 
of trade-offs and choices in this incredibly  

morally just significant moment, but also then 
to in this moment to scale up what we can and  

how fast we can in the energy efficiency, in 
reducing our dependency, right, as a whole,  

and scaling up the renewable energy and certainly 
Germany and the European Union, other countries  

are looking, I had other conversations with 
other member states who are moving as fast as we  

can, and I call on all of us to do that in 
that context. I think that the choices we have,  

and Minister Habeck's work, tireless work, 
to find those other sources, I think links  

in also with a point that you were making, which 
is, okay, we need to remove that dependency on  

Russian oil and gas as fast as possible, but we 
also have to ensure that we're not locking in  

long-term fossil fuel infrastructure from other 
countries that will then make the 1.5 degree  

climate goal completely impossible to meet. This 
is I think - I think we will show ourselves in  

the coming months how resolved, it's like a 
moment of truth, I think, for all of us, so  

therefore the conversations that Minister Habeck 
has about how to make things green hydrogen-ready,  

and also make sure that contracts are not these 
very long contracts, but I'm not aware of all the  

details in these contracts, but his statements are 
quite clear also with the United States, that the  

new agreement there with the European Union should 
not be increasing emissions further. We know that  

fracking obviously is not a climate-appropriate 
technology, but how to do that in a way that  

drives this down. I think to say, no matter what 
we have to do in this period of time to reduce  

and to end rather that dependency, it is also to 
see that we keep our goals in place in Germany,  

and in the European Union to 
phase out coal and fossil fuels. 
 

Thank you very much. Minister 
Cingolani, the same question to you. 
 

Of course we share a same situation with Germany, 
we are an intensive manufacturing company and  

import a lot of gas from Russia, about 
40%, 29 billion cubic metres every year.  

We are rushing in getting independence.  

We have five gas pipelines connecting the 
country, three are along the southern and eastern  

routes, so we're going to finish it very 
soon. We are increasing the number of ...  

two are coming. The target is to be very fast 
in replacing the 29 billion cubic metres,  

but I want to make a clear point. This is just 
replacing that amount of gas, and eventually,  

reducing that amount of gas, but there are other 
strategies that in parallel should be deployed.  

First of all, a mature approach to energy-saving. 
I want to remind, to the audience here, that  

every ten kilowatt hour we save in energy, 
we save one cubic meters of gas. So make the  

calculations very easy. So we're investing a lot 
in circularity. It is a very effective way to  

produce energy. Italy has a long tradition 
in transformational chemistry. We produce  

30 million tonnes of waste every year, and a large 
part of that can be transformed into energy or  

compost, reducing - producing - reducing - 
this is reduction of dependence on another,  

on the other hand, and also show the way towards 
a sustainable energy transition. Having said this,  

I would like to add something, no-one 
has mentioned the real problem, which  

is market speculation. Now the war of course 
is very emotional, and we are all extremely  

sorrier what is happening, and this is surely 
terrible in the year 2022. But, in in moment,  

in our European pipeline, the amount of gas that 
is flowing is exactly identical to the one that  

was flowing one year ago at this time. We are 
in the missing gas. The quantity is the same.  

So, can anybody explain to me why, one year 
ago, we were paying 25 cents per cubic metre  

and today we're paying 1.25 per cubic metre? If 
I store my gas, I need 15 billions now, now it  

is - it is a free market, I understand, 
but the market cannot be free  

on the shoulder of citizens and 
companies. Now, there were people who were  

beating on the fact that the gas - betting on 
the fact that the gas would be on the price, they  

were promising the sale of a large amount of 
gas at a given price, and then there was an  

unexpected event called the war, and now they're 
struggling finding the gas they didn't produce.  

Now this is something we, guys, all of us have to 
change, and this is nothing to do with the war,  

because the war is terrible, but also, 
market speculation is terrible. 
 

A major discussion of course in Brussels at 
the moment about how possibility to address  

that. Let me go back to the under Secretary 
of State - Adam Guibourg -Czetwertynski,  

and Poland will be the first EU member country 
to completely forgo Russian oil, coal, and gas.  

It shows that a majority of Poles 
would support a full EU-wide embargo  

of Russian fossil fuels. Other EU member 
states, like Hungary, say that is not possible,  

they rule out such action citing the risk of 
recession. What is your response to that? 
 

Well, I think I think - I think we said 
already, by Yaroslav, it would be difficult  

to do currently. The difficulty is nothing 
in comparison with avoiding a war. I believe  

that maybe, you know, being closer to the war 
in Poland, seeing on our streets the numbers of  

refugees, the drama of the situations, talking 
to them, maybe we feel that really this war is  

a real threat, and you realise that a world 
when you're further away. But I do believe,  

and if we want to avoid this Third World 
War, as mentioned by Yaroslav, we really need  

to be doing more, and the costs of these further 
actions is nothing in comparison with what we can  

avoid. I think the current situation has also 
clearly shown that relying on one technology,  

and one supplier for our transition has been a 
very huge risk, and unfortunately, that risk has  

materialised now, and we should really 
think when we rethink our strategy  

how to diversify our supplies, how to diversify 
the technologies that we use to produce energy,  

in order not to be so dependent on the 
single technology and the single supplier. 
 

Thank you very much. I would like to take a 
deeper dive on this, and also on the question  

of energy-savings. All of you energy savings. 
The IEA say turning down the thermostat one  

degree centigrade would cut consumption by ten 
billion cubic metres of natural gas over a year.  

That is a month's worth of Russian 
imports we're talking about here EU-wide.  

Indeed limits, partial restrictions on 
car use of the types we saw in the 1970s  

after the oil shocks, other methods would boost 
that, leading the Economist this week to conclude,  

I'm quoting that "Europe is asking too little 
of citizens". Would you agree with that,  

Deputy Minister Demchenkov? 
Just a few remarks  

regarding the previous speakers' messages. 
Crisis and opportunity are the two faces  

of the same coin. What time for now, we see 
more of a crisis side, still we believe that  

this whole - I share with the whole Ukrainians, 
that opportunity is right around the corner.  

The opportunity to build back safer, greener, 
and more resilient society and economy based  

on the principle of energy efficiency, 
climate neutrality, with the green deal,  

the European Union has committed to a complete 
overhaul in energy policy in the way of life.  

It is when we're talking about the future, and 
the current situation, first of all, thinking  

about how we could save more energy, how we could 
destroy this dependence, because, for Russia,  

this is very significant amount of budget. 
33% of their budget came from selling oil  

exports of Russian oil and gas. This is very 
important for us thinking about the future,  

limiting our co-operation with Russian 
energy companies, and regarding  

this issue, Ukraine is paying a high price for 
its independence and future, and this is not  

only for our independence and future, but also for 
European countries, and, as Adam has mentioned,  

we see understanding of all countries of this 
situation. That is why our contribution should be  

very significant, and very, as you have 
mentioned, we should do this immediately,  

because we don't have time for waiting. 
 

Asking for of citizens? I 
I remember Jimmy Carter  

sitting there in a quick sweater telling 
everybody to turn their thermostats down. 
 

I think maybe two parts of this. 
There is still clearly massive  

opportunities, whether it be through 
the circular economy, whether through  

energy savings, and I think we are seeing 
that from a government perspective in the  

package is moving forward from Germany and the 
EU of how to accelerate that and double down on  

those energy savings so they can happen as quickly 
as possible for all the reasons that we know.  

I think that indeed, if people want to know 
how they can help reduce Putin's power,  

and influence, then indeed thinking about what 
each person across Europe can be doing to reduce  

that demand, that comes with the very high price. 
I have had many conversations with people about  

how they each are making that choice. I think, 
you know, we live in Europe, in a situation where  

one can take those measures, and do so in a way 
that certainly in comparison to what is happening  

in Ukraine, is just a small way forward, a small 
way of showing that that solidarity. So I would  

call on people to think about that, to move 
forward, to know that you reduce Putin's power  

when you take your own action, and 
that every bit of that matters. 
 

Thank you very much. Minister Cingolani, 
and that means we should not pass on  

the inflated prices to citizens. What citizens 
and those who are concerned can actually do  

in the area of energy efficiency right now? 
Yes, I believe there is a twofold approach: one is  

the state should help energy-saving, for instance, 
by reducing, or improving, energy management in  

the residential housing, or traffic limitations. 
Citizens, and also, sorry, and also supporting  

programmes for public awareness. I mean, this 
is something that people - we cannot impose by  

law energy saving, or at least we can partially 
impose by law. This is a problem of system nation,  

education, public awareness. We need to invest in 
the young people. And it is not just reducing the  

thermostatic control or the heating of the house, 
or reducing the speed of the cars, saving is also  

properly managing food. We are wasting huge 
amounts of food, about - I mean I read in  

an UN report that with the food we waste in 
the so-called rich countries, we could feed  

three times as much the vulnerable countries with 
the food. We should think about that. Are we ready  

to operate on the end-of-life pipeline 
of all our goods to save materials,  

to recycle? Are we ready to produce cars 
that are indeed and acceleration-limited?  

I've been living in Germany for many 
years, and I'm Italian, so I like to drive!  

Why we build cars, even with the internal 
combustion engine, that are limited in speed  

at 250 kilometres per hour when the speed limits 
are universally set everywhere at 120, 130?  

Come on? We should start thinking. It is 
even a problem of marketing sometimes.  

So, this is a Cultural Revolution. We cannot 
impose this revolution simply by law. We have  

to invest in the new generations, I think. 
Thank you very much. Let me come back to you,  

Deputy Minister Demchenkov, and ask about the 
adverse side of what we are discussing. You  

made it clear that Putin is making it clear he 
wants to keep everybody hooked on natural gas,  

and doing everything he can to 
make sure that that gas can keep on  

flowing. There has been some concern 
expressed, certainly here in Germany, that,  

also beyond it, about what would happen if, 
in fact, Russian fossil fuels were to be  

cut off from one day to the next by the demand 
side, not by the Russians themselves, whether  

that could, in fact, lead a more isolated 
President put president facing extreme Putin  

facing extreme economic decline in his 
country to become more aggressive than less? 
 

This is a difficult to predict, and think about 
his actions, because he demonstrates that he  

is a really criminal of war, and this is quite, 
quite difficult to provide think forecast to do  

any forecast, and planning regarding possible 
actions from Russia, but we can do everything  

to stop Russia, and to be ready 
to live without Russian energy.  

And, first of all, our countries should give up 
on their decarbonisation goals, and I believe... 
 

And first of all, our countries should 
give up on their decarbonisation goals,  

and I believe that we should work together to  

achieve energy independency, and this 
is very important for us at this stage,  

because as you have mentioned, we understand that 
our countries were very dependent on Russia gas  

and other fossil fuels. And we should immediately 
conduct integration of our energy market. Freedom  

is really ?? freedom market is really good 
option and important option, but we should  

demonstrate solidarity when we implement in the 
European rules. For example ?? energy passage. We  

a half year ago saw that Nord Stream 
2, this is Russia's energy weapon,  

and this project should be conducted with the 
3rd energy package. And we told everybody that  

when Putin stormed this project, Nord Stream 
2, he will start invention and he did it. 
 

Unfortunately, our countries 
were not ready for this. And  

not do have such problems in future, we 
should think about diversifications of our  

energy sources and to reduce dependance 
on the predatory Russians energy sources.  

Last month demonstrated Europe's ability to 
unite in combatting aggression of Russia,  

and we hope the same will be true in the energy 
sector. And during the months of this full?scale  

war, for example, our energy system showed its 
resilience. It is quite difficult. Because at the  

first beginning ?? first day before the war, we 
disconnected from Russia and Belarus electricity  

grid. And during two weeks operated just using 
only our sources, all of our balancing system. 
 

And also this is important that during bombing 
and destruction of critical energy infrastructure  

will also demonstrate resilience. Frequency 
of our energy grids, 50 Gigahertz. This is  

a big threat and we should find a proper 
solution and stop these activities,  

demilitarise our nuclear facilities and deoccupy 
these nuclear facilities. Yeah, this is ??  

this is ?? international society should 
understand that this is not a game. This  

is not a movie. This is real life. This is 
real war. This is real death. And our actions  

against this should be also real. And this is not 
just only for business. This is for governments.  

Governments should do it immediately. And we 
really think your government from German and  

Poland and Italy, that you provide real support, 
and we hope in the future we will have even more  

because this is our joint war and 
we should do this joint effort. 
 

Jennifer, if I can just come back to something 
you said about a moment ago. You said about this  

moment of moral clarity that we face, and it 
strikes me that when we talk about sanctions,  

whether it would be a potential embargo on Russian 
fossil fuel imports or the sanctions that have  

already been put into place that are the toughest, 
certainly that the EU has imposed. If we do not  

not only to get a particular behave in the 
short term which, of course, doesn't happen  

right away, but simply to reinforce our moral 
standards, our norms. And if that's the case,  

are all of the arguments that are made about 
why we shouldn't do an embargo because it  

could cause more harm to us. Do they become 
less relevant when we look at it that way? 
 

I think the moral choices that are having to 
be made today are just incredibly difficult.  

I think ?? I think the commitment to go as fast 
as possible in weighing those different choices,  

which how do you weigh those things? I 
mean, you know, are happening in real time,  

thinking about the reality of what's happening on 
the ground in the Ukraine, the reality of here,  

the dynamics of the power games that are going 
on as well. And I think within that, you know,  

people are doing the best that they can to 
try and find that compass and a way forward.  

And to do things as quickly as possible to 
end that dependence, but also to recognise  

those other choices that are there. So ?? and as I 
said, I don't ?? I know that's not a satisfactory  

answer. I think it's an example of how in the 
world today the moral choices that are made,  

particularly in a values?based foreign policy, 
which we are working hard here to move forward,  

are incredibly challenging. And the moral choices 
of wartime, the moral choices of what we're all  

doing to faze out fossil fuels as a whole. We 
haven't talked too much about the ravage of  

the climate emergency that is happening around the 
world. We have to do all of this at the same time.  

We have to do all of it at the same time. And 
that is just a tremendous, momentous challenge. 
 

Absolutely. I was recently present at the 
United Nations FCCC for discussions, internal  

discussions, at which they said after the pandemic 
we thought we would be returning to climate change  

absolutely in the spotlight, and, in fact, what 
we're seeing is that, once again, one crisis sort  

of puts ?? shoves to the side or at least there's 
potential for these two crises, obviously, to be  

mutually productively reinforcing. Nonetheless, 
it's a lot of crisis to be handled. 
 

I wanted to ask whether we should briefly move 
on to what was supposed to be another central  

focus of this panel. For evident reasons, we 
have not given it much time. But essentially  

the geopolitics of where we're going. We've been 
talking a lot about the geopolitics of where we  

are, but maybe just a brief perspective from 
each of you on the shift to clean energy and  

the geopolitical risks that could be entailed 
there. Because, of course, a lot of the crucial  

inputs for wind, solar, green hydrogen are 
also concentrated in particular geographical  

regions that are not necessarily a great dole 
more politically reliable or well?governed  

than fossil fuel producers. So how do you see 
that trade?off? Is that something that concerns  

you and what can we learn going forward? 
Yeah, I admit I'm very concerned because  

there are a couple of important 
problems that we should  

somehow face. On one hand, there is about 3 
billion people on the planet. By the way, most  

of those are living in countries where there is 
a lot of sun. Who have no good access to energy.  

Sometimes no access to water. You know, there is 
a grey scale, but I don't think we can conceive a  

global ecological transition or a global energy 
transformation just by neglecting those 3 billion  

people. And this is what is happening now. So 
I think global equalities should be treated  

exactly at the same level or even with 
some priority as the climate emergency. 
 

The second thing is that we were ambitiously 
accelerating on the 1.5 degrees, just in the  

COP26, this happened a couple of months ago, China 
was accepting the challenge. And this means that  

over the next few years, the need of 
China of liquid gas will increase from  

the actual 300?something billions to maybe twice 
that much. About 600 billion cubic metres. Because  

they're gonna replace their coal?based primary 
energy production. So this is commendable on one  

hand. On the other hand, it's gonna imbalance 
completely the liquid gas market. So we want,  

of course, China to give the contribution, and 
we're all happy of that, but then we need to  

produce an incredible amount of liquid gas. 
So this will make things more complicated. 
 

So we have to take care of a large part 
of the planet population. That is really  

in the need of energy, water, agriculture, food. 
On the other hand, we have a massive change in the  

energy landscape in the advance of countries and 
we have to face those things. And once again, I  

don't think we can do this only with the renewable 
energy. So maybe we should seriously consider for  

the next three, four decades, what are we going 
to do? And I can say here ?? and I said in public  

already ?? I think we should accelerate in 
research and development in nuclear Fusion.  

I'll say it clearly. I didn't say fission. 
More moderate reactors could be use in specific  

energy?intensive districts, like the icebreaker 
in ships, but this is just a small portion of  

the need. For the future we have to think of 
something stable, long?living, safe, programmable,  

global energy source, and I think 
nature gives the lessons. And obviously  

the best way to produce energy. Humanity 
should make an effort in this direction and  

make an effort now. Now is the time to invest 
in that. Otherwise, in 20 years, we'll be here  

discussing more and more of the same problems, and 
possibly with a worse environmental situation. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me go to Undersecretary 
of State Czetwertynski for a perspective on the  

same issue. The shifting geopolitics of energy 
and the risks that we may see in the future. 
 

I mentioned that in my first comments, 
actually, that we are seeing, indeed,  

new risk associated with the new technologies 
that we are using. I think one element that  

we've seen in the past already, if we think, 
for instance, of the evolutions we have seen  

in terms of technologies that we use to produce 
batteries. We have seen that the metals we need  

for these batteries have evolved in the past. I'm 
pretty sure the technologies will also evolve in  

the future. So that reliance on specific materials 
is evolving as we will develop new technologies,  

and as we also will develop ways of recycling. 
And there Jennifer mentioned the importance of  

the secular economy in our transition. It 
is, indeed, something that is important. 
 

But I do believe as well that your question 
is very right. I mean, in the sense that  

if our strategy with, for instance, 
hydrogen, risks creating a new dependency,  

then we will probably think twice of how do we 
implement it. Because we need a strategy, we  

need technology that will reinforce our autonomy, 
our independence as Europe, and we need to invest  

in the European economy to provide the 
technologies that we need for the future. 
 

If our strategy is just providing new 
revenue streams for some ?? around the world,  

we should probably we think what we are doing. 
Mm?hmm. In fact, "The Economist" in the same  

article I mentioned earlier talks about a shift 
from petrol states to electro states and their  

autocrats. Let me ask all of you ?? we have 
very little time left on our clock, but just  

the briefest of final words from each of you. 
And as I was preparing this panel, I found myself  

wondering the following, and I'm 
gonna pass it on to you as a question.  

Is energy independence an illusion, even 
if we do accelerate the energy transition?  

Is it illusory to think we can be independent when 
it comes to energy. Vice Minister Demchenkov? 
 

Ukraine has been fighting an uphill battle against 
Russia and we believe that energy independency is  

the main opportunity for our future. For the 
past five weeks with support of our countries,  

Ukraine is holing Putin back and making him 
weaker. And the energy sector, especially  

oil and gas and nuclear energy, are pressure 
points for the corrupt economy and Putin's  

regime that has spread far beyond Russia. 
And the price of delay, this is the price of  

our energy independency, and the price of our 
energy security in the whole region. And that's  

why we should think about future. We should build 
our future based on climate?neutral technologies.  

We should think also ?? find real place of nuclear 
generation in this future. Because this is a  

significant amount of energy production. And we 
believe that we have good future and will build it  

together. And a green future. Thank you so much. 
Thank you very much. Jennifer Morgan. 
 

I mean, I don't know what else to say besides 
what you just said. I think that an illusion is  

to think that we can continue the way that we are 
going. An illusion is to think that a dependency  

on Russian fossil fuels or other fossil 
fuels is going to bring us any kind of  

stability and peace from climate disruption, 
from war, from energy disruptions. So I think  

we have no choice. We have to move forward. 
This is the way that we have to go. With  

determination. With compassion. With ambition. 
We have to be smart. We have to be strategic  

and move forward with that front and centre. 
Thank you very much. 
 

Well, I think in a very interconnected world 
being completely autonomous is impossible. You  

can have a reasonable independence. There is a big 
difference between being dependent on a country  

or being partially dependent on a country. I 
think we should have a reasonable trade?off.  

What we're doing now is quite reasonable. 
Thank you very much. Undersecretary of State Adam  

Guibourg Czetwertynski . 
I definitely agree that I do think this an  

illusion to think there is something without risk. 
There is always risk. If the current situation  

has something to teach us about the way we're 
planning our transformation, then we should really  

think about the importance of the diversification 
of supplies, but also diversification with  

technologies that we use to produce energy. 
Because at Minister Cingolani just said, if we  

are reliant on one energy, there is the risk that 
the risk will not be following us on this path. 
 

Thank you very much. It's always been a central 
path of the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue that  

the Energiewende is not a national undertaking, 
it's a global one. That's certainly something we  

heard from the foreign minister this morning. 
In that sense, that cooperation is clearly,  

and this is what I'm hearing from all 
of you, one key way to reduce risk. 
 

So with that, let me just return briefly to 
our Slido poll to take a quick look at the  

audience's answer. So in the end, 84% say the 
energy transition will make the world safer.  

12% say the effects will cancel each other out. 
That we'll see new risks that essentially balance  

out the gains. And 4%, just 4% say that 
the energy transition will make the world  

less safe. So I'd say that's quite an overwhelming 
majority. Thank you, dear audience, for voting,  

and warm thanks to all of our panellists 
for being with us here today, with a special  

thanks to Yaroslav Demchenkov for making the 
trip to join us in person. Thank you so much.


