I am joined now by Cornelius Matthes, the CEO, 
the chief officer of Dii Desert Energy. Welcome,  

thank you for joining me today.
Thank you for having me.
 

I want to get right into our questions with 
you. Desert Tech was founded 15 years ago.  

Where is the cheap electricity from the desert?
That is a good question. We made a study in 2012  

predicting long-term cost regressions to 2050. The 
optimistic assumption s in 2050 were far - this  

is where one to two cents solar, two to three 
cents wind, if not lower, so this outcompetes  

any other form of renewable generation, and let 
me reiterate the region has among the world's best  

wind resources, first of all, and it is known for 
the abundant solar, and this makes the hydrogen  

revolution possible. This is why we founded the 
Hydrogen Alliance, and green hydrogen can actually  

dwarf entire power systems, so this is really 
the big green molecule topic coming in,  

and complementing and accelerating the 
green be revolution on the electron side.
 

I want to come back to Desert Tech. In the past, 
accused of engaging in colonialist practices  

and colonialism. What has 
changed with Desert Tech 3.0?
 

It is a good question. Many things in the past 
changed. I think it is important to learn a lot,  

so first of all, the team moved in the region 
in 2015 to build local relations, so you need to  

develop a deep understanding and create 
solid trust basis with local stakeholders,  

governments, and everybody locally, maybe. Maybe 
from the start, the eye should have focused more  

on our core which is socio-economic factors. So 
socio-economic factors like it is job creation,  

stability, and the benefits for local 
markets, and indeed in a recent study,  

we focused entirely on the job creation potential 
on the more than a million jobs in hydrogen to be  

created in three GCC countries, all sorts 
of economic factors like water, like land,  

away we examined in a report, so these factors 
are usual, and this is really the main,  

the number-one point above any other factor is 
key success factor for the energy transition.
 

Getting out there locally. Incredibly important 
steps to be taken. Right now where we are in 2022.  

What is it going to be like for desert 
tech when we see each other in 15 years?
 

It is a good question. I think my colleague, 
his contract goes far beyond, to 2050, actually.  

Anyway, we've seen a revolution, and we see 
different factors coming together, extremely low  

cost, lowest cost ever, renewable energy, tipping 
points in terms of market share, technologies,  

so different things converging, which is a 
powerful cocktail for disruption and with  

the green molecule coming in, we see a massive 
acceleration of - for for any credible plan needs  

to be executed in this decade for next decade. The 
topic of security of supply which we pointed out  

ten years ago, so let's say fast-forward, in 15 
years from now, we see that the it will become  

locally a power-house for green electrons and 
molecules, and globally, this is the great thing,  

it will provide for stability for jobs, you know, 
for future technologies in green technologies,  

and energy transition, and we believe that really 
the region is strategically placed with the best  

resources, it will become a global powerhouse 
for green electrons and molecules.
 

Thanks very much, Cornelius Matthes, 
joining me for this studio session.


