So, welcome to this panel on Coastal energy: the 
winning horse for more power. Today we're gonna  

take a look on how to ensure coastal energy 
technologies can be achieved. And look out  

for which political measures can effectively 
pave the way for more coastal energy. And  

last but not least, how can more countries unlock 
the potential for tidal and wave energy products.
 

Joining me for this excellent panel are four 
distinguished guests. I would start with Dang  

Hoang An, the Vice Minister of Vice Minister 
of Industry and Trade for Vietnam. Thank you.  

Mr. Kristoffer Bottzauw, Director 
General, Danish energy agency.  

Amisha Patel, HDF Energy for 
Mainstream Renewable Power.  

And to my right, Vera Brenzel, Associate Director 
Public Affairs and Communication for TenneT.  

I want to get the panel started with the same 
question for each of you. And ask you to keep your  

responses to two minutes. But it's okay. I'm only 
asking for one word. And that is: In one word,  

what is for you the key lever that could unlock 
the full potential of coastal renewable energies  

such as offshore wind, wave, or tidal energy? I 
would like to start with you first, Minister.
 

It's actually the coastal energy is quite 
broad. Wave or tidal. But from my point of view,  

we should focus on the offshore wind. And I think 
the key level for Vietnam now actually is the  

readiness of the system. Since nowadays we focus 
on the development of the on shore wind farm and  

we are not so ready for the offshore wind. And 
so, to have more of the coastal wind farms. So,  

we should pay attention to the building and 
increase the capacity of the system to connect the  

offshore wind farm to the system. I think 
that's a key level. A little bit technical.
 

Thank you very much. So, for Vietnam, offshore 
wind the key lever. Mr. Kristoffer Bottzauw,  

how about you? You actually don't 
have to say it in one word.
 

Thank you very much. In my perspective, 
to have these technologies at a larger  

scale we need three words, actually. 
De-risking, size, and sector integration.  

And de-risking. That's a responsibility for the 
governments. We need to do whatever it takes to  

de-risk by making transparency, having a good 
regulation. Creating broad political agreements.  

When this comes to size, we need to count in 
gigawatt and not in kilowatt. We need to go  

up to have economies of scale. And lastly, we 
need sector integration. We need to integrate  

these new power technologies to other 
sectors like transport and agriculture.  

By producing power to X. Meaning 
ammonia or hydrogen, for instance.
 

Thank you very much, Mr. Bottzauw. Amisha 
Patel, one word? Three words? Your choice.
 

I'll take three words: Stable policy frameworks. 
I think what I'll start by focusing with I'll  

focus my comments on offshore wind as well 
if I may. Through impressive cost reductions  

and driven by continuous deployment, the offshore 
wind industry has grown by over 30% per annum in  

the past decade. Outcompeting many fossil fuel 
alternatives. We need to see more of this. So,  

I completely agree with my colleague here as well. 
We need this at speed, and we need this at scale.  

For this to continue at the accelerated 
pace, we need to see supportive  

policy and stable frameworks. And this has 
in frameworks, I'll leave that for later.
 

Fantastic, policy and frameworks. 
Vera Brenzel, your words, please.
 

It's not surprising, my biggest word is 
infrastructure. You need to get that onshore.  

Second word would be speed, because we don't 
have much time. And third would be scale.  

In the end, it's all about getting bigger quicker, 
faster, and, well, deliver security supply.
 

Absolutely. I would like to go into the next round 
of questions. And I would like to direct a couple  

of questions at one individual if that's okay with 
you. I would like to start off with Amisha Patel.  

I want to know a little bit about mainstream 
renewable power's track record when it comes to  

offshore wind energy products. In your experience 
as a project developer, what are some of the  

common features for the successful implementation 
of wind offshore projects globally.
 

Thank you. And there's nothing more that I like 
to do than talk about mainstream success in the  

area. Thank you for your question. Mainstream 
Renewable Power is one of the most successful  

in off shore wind. We have developed 20% 
of the UK's offshore capacity, now in  

operation or under construction. We have a strong 
legacy of developing projects. And the UK is one  

of the core places for developing projects 
with more areas opening up. Our 1.4 gigawatt  

offshore wind development in Vietnam is one 
of Southeast Asia's largest renewable energy.  

We are one of the early entrants into what is 
a very promising market and we hope this will  

pave the way for further developments in the 
region. We've recently entered the Japanese market  

as well as a partner in 800 megawatt. We are 
looking at floating offshore wind developments.
 

And we have an extensive team in the US, preparing 
for several options across the United States.  

Really just focusing on the developments there 
and sort of fulfilling the Biden Administration's  

30gigawatts target. We continue to influence 
renewable energy and offshore wind policy across  

the globe in promising offshore wind markets. 
Common for success, and I won't talk about policy  

so I won't talk about this right now.
But what I will say is collaboration is extremely  

important. So, it's not just government alone. 
It's industry and governments working together.  

And then collaborating and engaging stakeholders. 
So, stakeholder engagement is a critical factor  

for success and for common success. So, 
early and effective stakeholder engagement,  

critical to the success of a project. And I think 
this is about making sure that local communities,  

where we're developing projects, are brought along 
the way. This is going to be a technology that's  

new to several areas in the world. So, we need to 
make sure that everyone is educated and informed  

about this. Stakeholders include other marine 
users as well, other ocean users. So, coexistence  

is critical to the success of a project as well. 
Relationship with other marine users and the  

protection of sensitive ecosystems is critical.
And then engaging with the supply chain.  

Another set of key stakeholders. We need supply 
chains and we need to look at local value creation  

when we're developing projects as well. And 
these are common -- these are just some of the  

common factors that are needed for success.
These are some good common factors. I want  

to have a follow-up question for you. As a 
market player, what do you think -- one or  

two examples of what we need right now to 
rapidly ensure the coastal technologies?
 

In addition to what I've said, I think 
supporting infrastructure in parallel. So,  

ports and commitments to upgrading these. Good 
expansion as well. It's really, really essential.  

And I think something that I've picked up over 
the course of the two days are discussions around  

interconnection and how this is important 
as well to delivering energy security. So,  

offshore wind is set to be a really scalable -- is 
set to be a critical part of our energy security  

moving forward. So, we need to make sure 
that we utilize the best wind resource. So,  

interconnection is exceptionally important.
Thank you very much, Amisha Patel. Vera Brenzel,  

I saw you nodding your head a couple of 
times. I would like to ask you a question.  

I want you to tell me mow transition grid 
operators can drive forward the transition  

in general. And more specifically, what 
role do they play in developing the  

deployment of renewable energy in coastal areas?
Look, we come from an energy system that basically  

the power stations were built close to industry, 
close to the load. Now we're moving to a sort of  

entirely new architecture where the 
rich endowments of renewable I would say  

yield potentials are the base 
of the future energy supply.
 

And the North Sea I think is the world's largest 
energy endowment. And offshore energy per se  

specifically is I think the most cost efficient 
and I think my colleague, the Minister from  

Vietnam, can maybe also support that. That is 
why I think lots of countries are following this  

path. And we're together, I'm looking at 
Danish colleagues and together with the UK with  

the Netherlands. And we're an operator 
in the Netherlands and in Germany. We see  

that it's very, very important to set up a 
target grid and then back cast, you know,  

specifically to know where do we have to start 
now in order to be able to deliver 30 gigawatts,  

that's what the German wants until 2030. The Dutch 
governments wants 20. That's a big scale. We need  

to double up. You need larger converters, larger 
power interconnectors. And that is only possible  

if we really, you know, have those value chains 
or supply chains as we just heard seamless.  

If we have the right talent. And if we have 
the right political support. And planning  

and permitting in Europe is a big, big hinder.
We did talk in an earlier panel about bureaucracy.  

This is definitely an issue for policy to solve. I 
want to come back, October of last year, recently,  

the wind power booster. It's a great name. 
It's going to enable offshore wind energy use  

in the North Sea. Maybe you can tell 
us a little bit more about that?
 

Yeah. Normally you have a wind farm and 
interconnection to land. For 50 gigawatt for 2030,  

it's a salad of interconnection. What we try 
to do is affect as little as possible to the  

nature of the biosphere and also acceptance. We 
try to bundle like in a hub and spoke system.  

Building multi-hub terminals. And the first one is 
up in northern Germany. And basically, it connects  

a whole number of -- of accesses from wind power 
farms. And brings that energy and wheels that over  

to onshore. The wind booster has a triple -- 
a triple benefit. The first one is really the  

bundling. The second thing is -- is basically 
also to be able to connect different wind farms  

and then also level out, you know, the different 
electricity inject. Or in feet. And the third  

is that we also try to set the -- the -- pave the 
way for hybrid projects. Hybrid project means that  

we not only connect, but we also wheel over 
to let's say to Denmark, to UK. And we try  

to level out the grid and create the supply.
Thank you very much. You mentioned Vietnam.  

I would like to head now to the Minister 
from Vietnam. Your excellency, in the COP26  

in Glasgow last year, it was pledged that Vietnam 
will reach the net-zero carbon target by 2050.  

Congratulations on this very ambitious 
pledge. Vietnam sees 8 gigawatts by 2030.  

What role is offshore wind going 
to play in reaching this target?
 

We see that the offshore wind could be 
the solution for Vietnam to reach the  

target that's announced in the COP26. 
And we have a plan to increase a portion  

of the offshore wind up to 20% of the system 
capacity in 2045. And which is a huge number. So,  

that -- that basic idea for Vietnam in the 
implementation phase for the COP26 targets.
 

How does Vietnam plan to attract 
investors for offshore wind projects  

that were gonna take place in the near future?
Good question. I met a lot of investors coming  

to the ministry of Vietnam and ask the same 
question. What can we provide to them? I  

can guarantee to all the investors that 
we have very fast-growing market for them.  

And for the investor, the market is the most 
important factor. Since we can guarantee to  

them that the demand of the power shall increase 
8 or 9% each year from now on up to next 20 years.  

And so, their revenue and it's very ensured. 
And secondly, we have prepared a very  

clear and transparent framework for the 
investor when they come to Vietnam. And  

if they are interested. So, they might 
apply for the project. That's very key.
 

It is definitely key to get investors on your 
side. What about public support? What kind of  

schemes do you have in place to get the public 
on board for this offshore wind projects.
 

Yeah. I think for the offshore wind, 
we don't have much any -- you know,  

the complaint from the public society 
and so on. For the onshore wind. So,  

sometimes we can see the local community, 
they might not so support. Especially when the  

project might consistent in the forest, for 
example. But for offshore wind, absolutely  

the local authority, the local community, they are 
supporting it. I don't think that's a problem.
 

Thank you so much, Minister. I would like to turn 
now to Kristoffer Bottzauw. Denmark is a pioneer  

in the development of offshore wind power. And has 
the world's longest experience from wind power.  

I would like to learn from you. What are some 
positive lessons you have learned so far?
 

Yes, well. You think there's a lot, 
actually. But let me take you just  

10 years back in time. And we had in 
Denmark, the wind farm, 400 megawatt.  

It was an immature market. And we need to 
support by 15Euro cents per kilowatt hour.  

And then back to last year. We had the 
full, and six prequalified bidders and five  

saying almost that they didn't need any support. 
And they were willing to pay 400 million Euros  

to the Danish government to have this -- 
to have this spot for the next 30 years.  

And it tells me that within 10 year, we have moved 
from an immature technology, immature industry  

towards very professional industry. And a cost 
effective industry. And some of the main features  

and some of the -- the main focus from government 
side has been on focusing entirely on the prize.
 

And entirely on de-risking. Do 
it as transparently as possible.  

No local content requirement. International 
competition. And very high market dialogue.  

Being in dialogue with the market all the time. 
Asking the pre-qualified bidders what can we do  

to bring the price down from a government 
perspective? And I think we managed last year to  

tell Denmark and maybe the rest of the 
world that offshore wind is not a supporting  

game anymore. It's actually an income game for the 
Ministry of Finance. So, we have changed the game  

within 10 years. And just to 
stress, look at the price.  

That's the best way of having a professional 
market and a professional industry.
 

Thank you. I want to follow that up. You started 
10 years ago and it was too early for the market.  

What other road blocks has Denmark encountered 
and how has the country overcome them? Now you  

are the country with the highest share 
of offshore wind in the electricity mix.
 

More than 50% of the electricity 
comes from wind, onshore and offshore.  

We started in 1991. We have more than 30 years 
of experiences. Well, as I told you before,  

look at the price. But we also realized 10 
years ago that you need to put the offshore wind  

away from the coast. If you do it too close, you 
can have a lot of critical voices from the coast.  

So, if you go 10 kilometers or more, maybe 20, 
you can reduce the -- the local position. And  

this is -- this is actually a good story. It's 
very important for the society that we have this  

large renewable energy production. And if 
we have local communities that are very much  

against it, the story will be harmed. So, put 
it out at sea. 20 kilometers or so. Then you  

will have the support. That's one of the -- the 
road blocks that we crashed into 10 years ago.  

And now we have set at least 15 
kilometers from coast. Or even longer.
 

Thank you for sharing that road block. 
You know, I come to these panel sessions  

with a list of questions that I'm prepared to 
ask. But what's so wonderful about having you  

all here is I get to see as you respond to one 
another. And I would love to open the panel up  

for, please, Amisha Patel.
I just want to build on that. And,  

you know, complete agreement there 
that there's a lot of opposition  

due to the visual impacts on the industry and they 
have grappled with that. But I'm going to fly the  

floating offshore wind as well. Over 80% of the 
global coastal offshore wind capacity lies within  

deeper waters. So, the emergence of floating 
offshore wind technology opens us up to be  

able to alleviate some of those problems and sort 
of go in and really utilize deeper waters and the  

extensive wind resource that is available there as 
well. And we're seeing a lot of markets open up to  

offshore wind because of floating technology.
Thank you very much for that, Amisha Patel. I  

want to make sure we have time to say closing 
statements, but don't want to cut this short.
 

I have a question, Kristoffer, we meet in the 
North Sea. We are the infrastructure providers.  

We connect to many Danish wind farms. The 
question is how do we design a market, in the end,  

we have energy policies, but a North Sea 
cooperation. And maybe have an idea on that?
 

Well, we need to use the EU as -- as a 
driver, I think. But we also need to look  

abroad. If you look at the North Sea, some of 
our neighbors are not part of the EU anymore.  

We cannot do it entirely in the EU. But we 
need surely to have the right instruments  

to cover it with each other. Because look at 
Denmark. We have a large share of the North Sea.  

But we not have the demand that can have the 
intake. So, we need connections to Germany. We  

need connections to Netherlands, Belgium, UK.
So, we need to create a North Sea grid,  

actually. Connecting the countries.
Maybe I can echo that. We're working  

on a DC meshed system which is in -- I 
think it's very innovative and a huge  

game changer because we are just leveling 
up in a short time. And being able to  

connect together. So, that's a very good chance.
Thank you very much. I see you all nodding along  

with each other, which is a real pleasure for me 
as a moderator. You make my job really easy. So,  

thank you so much. I want to open the conversation 
up again to our Minister from Vietnam, Mr. Dang  

Hoang An. Please, I would love for you to leave us 
with some parting thoughts. Your final statement.
 

Yes. There are a lot of work to do in Vietnam. 
So, for the more ambitious wind energy sector. So,  

coming back to our topic today as mentioned 
before, the duty now of Vietnam is to prepare  

the system infrastructure for the coastal energy.  

And as I mentioned before, the coastal energy, 
especially the offshore wind, is a solution for  

Vietnam. But also this is a must for Vietnam. We 
don't see another way to meet the target of COP26.  

Since in Vietnam we are looking -- we are the 
country who has to import a lot of the primary  

fuel like coal, like the energy and so on.
So, we see the coastal offshore wind.  

There's a must for Vietnam. And 
it's really a lot of work to do.
 

Thank you very much. The idea of the work that we 
have ahead of us. I would like to bring that into  

the rest of the group, Mr. Kristoffer 
Bottzauw. What work has to be done? What  

priorities do we have to set to effectively 
pave the way for more coastal energy?
 

Yeah. To have the system ready to accept 
the power from the offshore farm with the  

skill like he says. We have experience like 
that. We used to have the very big power complex  

like 4 or 6,000 megawatt offshore. From the 
technology point of view from the transmission,  

we have very long extra high voltage. Connecting 
across the region. So, I think that's okay.  

With even -- with the submarine, extra high 
voltage. So, from technology point of view,  

that's not for Vietnam. But the early important 
is that we now have the master plan for power. And  

from now on to 2030. And also looking out to the 
2045 where we approve soon by the government. So,  

make the framework for the investor to pull in 
Vietnam. And secondly, we are trying our best  

to solve, you know, whether, you 
know, some the stuck in the project  

application and so on. You think 
that's what we need to do now.
 

Thank you very much. Mr. Bottzauw. 
I would love to hear from you.  

Which priorities need to be defined to 
effectively pave the way for more coastal energy?
 

Actually, I think I want to repeat myself from the 
beginning. Because I think if you're a government,  

then please do whatever it talks to de-risk. 
Go up in size. Get the economies of scale. And  

focus on sector integration. You think that's the 
new keyword. And that will be the -- the gate for  

offshore wind into other sectors and industries.
Thank you very much. Amisha Patel.  

What do we need to do to pave the way?
Well, I'm in agreement with a lot -- with  

what Kristoffer has said. But the one thing I 
guess I want to kind of leave the audience with  

here is something that has been emphasized across 
the two days. Which has been very encouraging.  

And that's this acknowledgment that 
offshore wind delivers energy security.  

Offshore wind can fill the gap left by retiring 
fossil fuel and meet increasing demand and reduce  

our reliance on imported energy which we have 
been talking about energy independence over the  

course of the last few weeks. That's a really 
important acknowledgment. Echoing again, yes,  

policy drivers. And collaboration between industry 
and governments to streamline processes and really  

realize the benefits of coastal energies across 
the world. So, that momentum to continue.
 

So important for that momentum to continue. 
You know, the theme of this BETD is from  

ambition to action. We have to take 
the momentum that we have brought,  

that everyone here has brought to the 
two days, back to the home countries,  

back to the home corporations and really take 
ambition and turn it into action. Vera Brenzel  

to close out the round. What needs to be done 
to pave the way for more coastal energy?
 

I would like to repeat myself as well. I could 
not support more of what my colleagues have said.  

I think planning and processing is where 
planning and permitting that process needs to be  

streamlined. It's always very flattering to bring 
out new targets. But then we need to do, you know,  

the after work to the implementation. That is 
really something they really call on governments  

to get going. But I think, you know, the beauty 
of this entire discussion that we have here,  

we're really fixing the trilemma. We're using, 
for example, the Asian qualifications to provide,  

you know, supply chains, talents and also scale 
for -- to bring volumes into of renewables.  

We know that together we can provide securitive 
supply if we work together. The UK, the Denmark,  

the Netherlands and Germany. And I think that's a 
big discussion this day. And I think affordability  

is something we have not touched upon. But 
scale is the back of the coin of affordability.  

Because we make it more accessible, cost 
efficient. And in the end, we have a long-term  

feasibility or also, you know, price insurance. 
And that's what you are calling de-risking. We  

don't have a de-risked fossil world these days.
What is it going to take for us  

to get there? For you, and for the 
panel. Affordability a really big issue.
 

The three big levers of affordability are 
economies of scale, standardization, and  

reducing the basically the entire -- how would 
I say? Throughput. It takes 8 years today. Up to  

10 years to produce a new interconnector. We 
could do it in half the time. The emergency
 

Ukraine and Moldova, it was planned to take 
another two years, but if people want it and  

we have resolve. We can make it. We can do it.
We can do it. I can't add anything to that. Ladies  

and gentlemen, thank you so much for tuning into 
the panel. I want to name the wonderful panelists  

one more time. From the left, his excellency, Dang 
Hoang An, Vice Minister of Industry and Trade,  

Kristoffer Bottzauw, director general 
Danish energy agency, Amisha Patel,  

HDF Energy, Mainstream Renewable Power, Vera 
Brenzel, Associate Director Public Affairs and  

Communication, TenneT. The winning horse for 
more power. I'm going to bet on this.
     


