Well, thank you so much, Melinda, and 
hello, everyone. It's terrific to be here  

in Berlin in person. Actually, in an 
in-person meeting. And many thanks to our  

German hosts here. And we could not be gathering 
together at a more momentous time in the world's  

global clean energy transition. Today, we are 
facing three crises, all stacked on top of each  

other. The first is our shared climate crisis, 
which of course, we've been facing for many,  

many decade, but each year, it is escalating 
in intensity, in urgency. Extreme weather  

back in the 1980s in the US caused about 
US$18 billion in damage in the 1980s.  

That number last year was $145 billion, just to 
underscore how much more severe the consequences  

of climate change already is. While 70% of our 
world is now covered in some kind of Net Zero  

commitment by political leadership, our emissions 
are still rising. We're not doing enough; we're  

not doing it with an urgency in the real world. 
Our second layer of crisis is COVID-19, and all  

we've been dealing with in the last two years. 
Job losses, deaths, a battered global economy.  

COVID-19, of course, should also 
be pointed out, through our global  

energy markets, our supply chains are out of 
whack in ways that we're still dealing with.  

And, well, all of us had a generational 
opportunity in the words of President Biden to  

build back better out of COVID-19, unfortunately, 
the analysis, the numbers have shown not enough  

countries step up around the world to build back 
better, and what we saw is our emissions are  

roaring back, they're bouncing back out of this 
COVID-19 crisis. And then our third layered crisis  

is President Putin's completely unprovoked 
war in Ukraine, on the Ukrainian people, on  

self-determination, on an ability of people to 
decide their own neutral. Let me say as clearly  

as I possibly can: as a representative of the 
United States, our country, our government,  

all of our society stands in some dear the 
with the Ukrainian people, and we are committed  

to supporting our European allies, our European 
partners, during this dark time in this continent.  

Putin has sought to divide us, but, 
instead, the free world is more united  

than it's ever been before. We have 
imposed aggressive sanctions on Russia,  

and we are prepared further to ramp up 
those efforts. As President Biden spoke here  

and into the weekend in Europe, to sustain that 
pressure for as long as it absolutely takes.  

President Putin's actions, 
of course, have sent energy  

markets reeling, further disrupted supply chains, 
and increased costs to consumers around the world.  

This unity and urgency of purpose we've seen 
in the immediate aftermath this invasion,  

this solidarity, has led to this unprecedented 
partnership that is also the way we can find  

ourselves out of these three layered crises to our 
global clean energy transition. There is no doubt  

that we're going need to take some near-term 
measures, we're going need to take emergency  

measures, as we go forward, to blunt the near-term 
consequences of Putin's war on the Ukrainian  

people in the Ukrainian self-determination. One is 
on natural gas in Europe. One country is exporting  

LNG - liquefied natural gas - at historic levels. 
President Biden confirmed the commitment to  

further support the EU and support the people of 
Europe when it comes to natural gas in near term.  

We are working with IEA countries around the world 
to use our strategic stocks. We've already had one  

collective response of 60 million barrels 
to try to put more supply into the market,  

a bridge to further production coming online. 
And we also need to do everything we can  

to use our efficient - we need to use our 
energy as efficiently as we possibly can.  

Again, credit to the IA to putting out terrific 
analysis on how to reduce gas usage here in  

Europe, and reduce oil usage around the world. 
We should be energy-efficient at all times,  

but this is an especially urgent time, as 
the German government has recently stated  

to be as energy-efficient as we possibly, 
possibly can. In addition to these near-term  

measures, the second part of our 
strategy just has to be to double down,  

and I say teen triple down, or quadruple down, 
on accelerating our clean energy transition.  

Clean energy is ultimately what is going 
to get that us beyond these three crises,  

to weather the energy crises of the future, 
and to provide our all our people sustainable,  

affordable, and clean energy supplies. Clean 
energy is diverse, it's abundant - whether  

it is solar, wind, hydro-or advanced nuclear, 
it's resilient, affordable, helps create jobs,  

grow our economies to $23 trillion clean energy 
and economic opportunities of the future.  

And clean energy can free us from volatile oil 
and gas markets and the whims of dictators. Now,  

we've got to work on supply chains 
and critical minerals for these clean  

energy technologies at the scale we need 
them, and we need to work with a sense of  

urgency and purpose on that which we look forward 
in the US to working with countries around the  

world. Over this past month alone, we've seen 
countries around world stepping up, responding  

to these immediate energy security challenges 
with increased investments in careen energy.  

President von der Leyen has quoted that as soon 
as Europe switches to renewables, the quicker  

they will have independence. France has boosted 
a government subsidy for residence heat pumps;  

Germany's further accelerating solar and wind 
projects, backing 100% zero-emission vehicles by  

2035; Brazil will increase its installed capacity 
of grid-connected solar and win, and I could go on  

and on. In the US, we are doing everything 
we can to urgently to aggressively  

move towards our ambitious goals: over 50% 
reduction by 2030; 100% clean electricity by 2035,  

and Net Zero by 2050. At the US Department 
of Energy alone, we are investing $62 billion  

in new funding on clean energy from 
President Biden's bipartisan infrastructure  

for - billions more to upgrade our electronic 
grids, investing in clean manufacturing supply  

chains, including, and especially for battery 
supply chains, boosting energy efficiency.  

It goes on and on. We're investing in the 
clean-energy technologies of the future to  

make sure that we've not just clean electricity, 
clean transportation, decarbonized sectors,  

industrial sectors. We've got a sector of 
our energy ?? reducing the cost dramatically  

for clean, green hydrogen at scale. Long 
duration storage. Carbon removal technologies.  

And we're doubling down on partnerships around 
the world. Just had a two?hour session with our  

German colleagues and our bilateral energy 
and climate partnership. Doubling down,  

tripling down on those partnerships. We're 
leveraging our national labs to something called  

Net Zero World to try to help countries around the 
world achieve their successes. The three?layered  

climate, COVID, energy crisis we face demand we 
respond urgently to accelerate this clean energy  

transition. The events of the past few weeks 
have shown how invaluable partnerships,  

solidarity, working together could be to solving 
these critical challenges. We have a unique  

moment right now. Let's not waste this 
moment to chart a path away from climate  

devastation and insecurity and towards an 
inclusive and fair energy transition for everyone.  

We can do this, but only if 
we all do our respective parts  

and only if we work together. And my message here 
for you is the United States stands ready, eager,  

willing to partner. Not just with 
Germany, not just with Europe, but all  

countries, companies, peoples of 
the world. Thank you very much.


