Birgit Schwenk. Hello. Welcome. 
Thanks for coming to us today. 
 

Thank you very much, Jennifer. I'm very happy to 
be here and very happy for this opportunity to  

introduce what we are going to do in the 
G7, environment, climate, and energy track  

of the G7 presidency this year. As I've already 
mentioned, it's the environment, climate,  

and energy track. We're doing a ministerial 
meeting on these issues together by the end of  

May, and we believe that they belong together very 
strongly. Because the energy sector is actually  

where many or most of the to?dos actually 
lie with respect to climate action. 
 

So if we want to achieve the 1.5 degree pathways, 
we have to act very, very quickly. So the 2020s  

will have to bed decade of action, otherwise we 
will miss that pathway, and we can't afford to do  

that. The good news is that the IPCC has told us 
that it is still possible to keep within the 1.5  

degrees. So action is more important than ever. 
So what are we going to do in the G7? The G7,  

as the industrialized countries that have to show 
leadership, have a special responsibility here,  

I think, to follow up on what our predecessors 
in the G7 presidency, the United Kingdom,  

have achieved both in their G7 presidency and at 
the COP26. So showing leadership for 1.5 degrees  

means that we have to stay true to the Paris 
Agreement and to the Glasgow Climate Pact. And  

what will be crucial this year, I think, 
is to give credibility to our targets. 
 

We want to reach those targets and will make 
this a decade of action. So what are concrete  

measures that we want to take under the G7 
presidency? Industrial decarbonisation will  

be a very important issue for us. So as Oliver 
Rentschler's just mentioned, green hydrogen as  

the shooting star of this year's BETD. You will 
be happy to hear that we are actually proposing  

a Hydrogen Action Pact as part of the industrial 
development ?? Industrial Decarbonisation Agenda.  

Sorry, Jennifer, for this one. So this is where 
we want to make progress. We will also have  

sectorial policies at the forefront, which 
I think is relatively new in that area. So  

we are going to speak about transportation 
as well. And about the building sector. 
 

But coming back to our energy sector, 
that is the main subject here of the BETD.  

I think coal faze out is actually on the top of 
our minds at the moment. And the current crisis,  

the innovation of Russia to Ukraine, has shown 
to all of us how important it is to become more  

independent from fossil fuels, from coal and 
eventually from gas. So we have to accelerate  

the energy transition rather than give up on our 
climate action targets. So while at the moment the  

demand for ?? or, well, let's say the 
importance of securing our energy supply,  

our energy security is at the forefront. Is 
foremost on everybody's mind. We believe, and this  

is something that the G7 concurred on strongly, 
we believe that climate action and the energy  

transition at the end of the day will be what will 
save us from dependance. Which will actually be  

the solution to energy security as well. 
So we are keeping to our agenda. We're not  

only keeping to our agenda, but we accelerate 
the energy transition as a reaction to the  

current innovation in Ukraine. So what else? 
Of course, we are not only looking at the G7.  

We have to show leadership, but we have 
to also look at how we can partner up  

with our partners in the developing world and in 
this area, we are planning to work on and expand  

on our partnerships. Just transition partnerships. 
Just energy transition partnerships are one area  

which we will focus on. There has been a model 
with the Just Energy Transition Partnership  

last year with South Africa. So we're looking 
at expanding this model to other countries.  

Our chancellor has also suggested to establish 
a climate club, which is something that we're  

working on with our G7 partners. And 
finally, we have to show solidarity,  

and we want to show solidarity with developing 
countries also in reaching the $100 billion U.S.  

climate finance goals. 
So these are some of the  

issues that we want to tackle, that we 
want to work on in our G7 presidency. 
 

Thank you so much, Birgit Schwenk. You 
know, the theme of this year's BETD is  

from ambition to action. It sounds like Germany 
has lots of ambition for the G7, and I can't wait  

to see all the action that Germany is about 
to take. Thank you both to both of my guests  

so much. Oliver Rentschler and Birgit Schwenk 
joining us here today on day 2 of the 2022 BETD.


