Thank you Jennifer, clearly a lot of discussion 
happening here in Berlin but also around the  

world. Thank you very much for your participation.
It is now my pleasure to reintroduce and to  

also welcome a new speaker to the stage today.
So, we've already had very powerful remarks from  

the Minister Svenja Schulze and also Secretary 
Kwasi Kwarteng. It is my absolute pleasure to  

introduce Patricia Espinosa, and you're absolutely 
welcome. Patricia is the Executive Secretary  

of the UNPCCC. We will consider in the next 40 
minutes, if we cover a deep dive on the three  

broad topics around the - I know, right! - around 
the SDG. We will want to talk a little bit about  

international co-operation. We touched on 
that with opening remarks. We also want to  

talk a little bit more on the just transition, 
and then a topic that is near and dear to me:  

women's economic empowerment and how you include 
women in this very, very important work. So those  

are the three broad topics we are going to discuss 
in only 40 minutes, but first I would like to give  

everybody on the panel here a chance to give some 
introductory remarks, and we will proceed from  

there. I will start with you, Svenja Schulze?
I think when we look at SDG7, we see that we  

still have a long way to go to provide the 
universal reliable energy supplies in line  

with their needs. We need 100% renewable energy 
and 100 climate-neutral sources and make more  

sense for energy on everyone. There are still 760 
million people, nearly, that have no access to  

electricity, and that is something that we need to 
take care of, and we need an enormous investment,  

and this investment that cannot be shouldered 
by the countries themselves. It needs the  

industrialised countries to help. I think that is 
our responsibility, and that we have to discuss,  

and that we need to change, and we need to change 
also the way we do it. You just mentioned we have  

to take women with us. There are such a lot of 
powerful women - we see Patricia here. She is  

one of the women. Linda, yourself, you're very 
engaged in energy questions. Secretary Kwarteng,  

UK is appointing women in leadership positions. 
There is so much action, and I think we have  

to put that together. We need also the stronger 
women for SDG7, and there is a lot to do still. 

Thank you.
Thank you very much. It's great to  

be here with you. Can everyone hear me? Is that 
clear? Good. I wanted to say it is fantastic we  

can all be here in person, but as Svenja says, 
there is still as we speak, or than 750 people  

without access to electricity. That is 10% of the 
entire global population. As long as there are  

so many hundreds of millions without access to 
electricity, that should really focus our minds  

on the need to accelerate this transition. 
For me, SDG7 represents a huge opportunity  

to ensure that people have access to modern 
amenities, but we've got to do this in a way  

that is sustainable, and we can't do it 
as before and not think about the natural  

environment that we live in. One of the great 
things that I was very pleased about in COP26  

was that really it marked a great change 
in how we mobilise capital, finance,  

how we get the private sector engaged with this 
challenge. We've got lots of new ambitions, lots  

of new targets. We also have lots of policies, 
and I think if we can honour some of the promises  

that we've made, and we can deliver on the 
finance, I think we can meet SDG7 in 2030.  

It's very challenging but definitely 
within our grasp, and through that,  

we will be able to keep the 1.5 degrees 
alive. Plenty of challenge and opportunity,  

and we have to stay focused to get there.
Thank you  

to the German government for convening this 
at this moment in time, especially in the  

current environment we are living in, 
where energy is really at the centre  

of the attention. Energy has been at the 
centre of the discussion on climate change.  

I would like to add one figure to the 
number that Svenja and Secretary Kwarteng  

mentioned that over 10% of the global population 
does not yet have access to electricity. Another  

figure that is very striking is that more than 40% 
do not have access to clean cooking facilities.  

Imagine what that means in terms of health, 
in terms of the nutrition for the children;  

what kind of environment they are living in. At 
the same time, my main message is to stress that  

while there is a lot of concern, how are we going 
to achieve this universal access to clean afford  

able energy? And, at the same time, address 
the challenges of climate change? We need to be  

really confident about the fact that actually we, 
globally, we do have the means in order to achieve  

that. We have the technologies, we know how to 
do it, so the big challenge today is to have  

a massive, massive dissemination of these 
clean technologies around the world.  

And that of course has to do with planning, 
with institution-building in the countries,  

with the international community providing also 
support for building capacities in the countries,  

because a lot of of these of course 
have to do is the developing world.  

In the developed world, this is not such an 
issue, although I have to say regarding clean  

cooking facilities, that is also a challenge 
in some developed countries. There institutions  

are already established. The big, big 
issue is how to do this in the south,  

in the developing world - how to build those 
capacities, how to put in place the plans,  

and how to implement them? How to disseminate, 
and how to make an accelerated and massive  

deployment of these technologies. That 
is the big challenge, and, of course,  

the question of women, the role of women, and just 
by looking at the figure of 40% of the population  

not having access to clean cooking facilities 
indicates very clearly the important role of women  

that they need play. In some houses, men are 
also cooking, but I would say that normally  

the women are the ones that are the 
providers of the foot for the family  

normally. It's more exceptionally the man is 
cooking, but normally it's the women. Over to  

you. And thank you for this invitation. It's an 
honour for me to be sharing this panel with you. 

Thank you very much. Definitely powerful words, 
and thank you, Patricia, for introducing a topic  

that is near and dear to me personally and those 
in Africa, who understand the drudgery, who  

understand the pain, who understand the impact, 
the socio-economic impact of lack of clean,  

safe, affordable cooking fuel. Thanks very 
much for those, and thank you also for the  

other remarks, which kind of really brings us 
to start to do a deep dive in how to proceed,  

right? How do we proceed with today's topic in 
terms of bringing safe, affordable, sustainable  

energy for all? I would first like to bring in the 
audience, and let's answer the slide yes question.  

This one is an easy one. Every single panellist 
basically gave the answer to this question,  

which is quite serendipitous. The Sli.do 
question, if that can come up on the stage:  

how many people worldwide lack energy access? 
This is according to SEforALL statistics.  

That should be an easy one. It was repeated 
by every single speaker on stage today!  

I expect nothing less than than 100% from you, 
audience! So while you're working on that,  

let us kind of move on to really our 
topic today, how do we proceed from here?  

This is really a deep dive with you, 
Svenja, because you covered a lot of this  

in your opening remarks. How does Germany 
support that aim? Right? Specifically  

what role is - what role is your government in 
international co-operation in SDG7? Specifically? 

We do that in two ways. We have to do our 
homework. We have to phase out coal. We believe in  

100% renewable energy s, and we need to speed that 
up because of the war from Russia against Ukraine,  

because we are very dependent on gas, on oil, on 
coal from Russia. We want to phase that out as  

soon as possible. The second one is we need 
international co-operation. We need to work  

together and speed up the international work 
we do there, because it is a worldwide problem.  

There are a lot of countries that are not able 
to deal with that by themselves. And so we need  

partnerships, and we need strong partnerships, 
not partnerships where one of the people say  

that is the way, you have to go ... partnerships 
that are a real partnerships, working together,  

putting the problems on the table, and then work 
together to solve them, and the industrialised  

countries, they need to give more money for that, 
and I don't know - I feel the finance minister in  

my neck! I know that is what we need, and we need 
these international actions, and we need to speed  

up that, and so I'm really happy that we have 
a signal from Glasgow, that we work together,  

this example, I put in my speech with 
South Africa, I think in this way, we need  

more partnerships. I really welcome the energy 
transition campaign. The UK launched that, this is  

really, really good to boost the process. We saw 
at the high level dialogue on energy in September  

that the United Nations has the convening power 
to unit us, and bring us together. I think we need  

more of this action. We need more coming together, 
speed up what we are doing, and I think UN energy  

can play a special role by working for 
co-ordination across the activities and the  

energy agenda in the UN, and its agencies, and the 
global high-level dialogue in the energy road map,  

that is the vision, that is the guidance we 
have. And we have to speed up action on that. 

Thank you very much for those remarks. They 
absolutely are very powerful. If we have time,  

I would like to come back to you and ask when we 
are criticised, when Germany is criticised, that  

the phase-out of coal is not fast enough, I would 
be curious to know what your response is to that  

if we have time at the end of this talk. I would 
like to pick up some of the themes that Svenja has  

raised there. The UK recently hosted COP26, where 
many action plans were designed, right? We have  

the Glasgow Climate Pact, the Glasgow Breakthrough 
Agenda, which also includes a power breakthrough.  

How do you specifically support these plans and 
what actions are you as the UK taking towards  

energy security both at home and worldwide?
Specifically on the agenda, we have a British  

Energy Security Strategy which is coming out 
imminently, coming out probably next week,  

or in the next few days. That's something 
which is really trying to bring together  

not only the work weaving done internationally in 
terms of pursuing of driving the Net Zero agenda,  

but also is specific to the situation we're 
in with respect to Russia and Ukraine. So  

oil independence, gas independence - all of these 
things require a range of renewables we've talked  

about which does two things: it reduces 
dependence on potentially hostile powers,  

and their hydrocarbons, gives us a measure of 
security, but it also helps us to decarbonise,  

because these are renewable technologies. Svenja 
mentioned them in her speech - we talked about  

offshore, onshore, solar, and this is the future 
giving us two things: independence, and it also  

gives us decarbonisation. So that's very much 
of our focus. As far as COP26 was concerned,  

that really demonstrated what Svenja was talking 
about: this is real partnership. That was a phrase  

she used. All these break through agendas, 
that was brought about by combining  

different countries in the way that Svenja has 
described. That's what we are doing. That's why  

I'm here. That's why we are trying to convene 
lots of people together. That is not only to  

set ambitions, but, as Svenja said, 
to help countries also also achieve  

real change in this area. One area at COP26 
that was very successful was in finance.  

You will remember the Copenhagen Pledge - 2009 - 
for $100 billion. It took us 11 years, 12 years,  

really to get the people signed up to that. I was 
very pleased that in COP26 we did that, and the  

money will start being deployed in 2023. That's 
real commitment, but also backed up by action. 

So what we are hearing is the ingredients are 
there, the financing is there, the technology  

is there, we just have to deploy it, and deploy it 
very, very quickly. Thank you very much. I want to  

turn over to you, Patricia. As Executive Secretary 
of the UNSCCC, you have a tough job, of steering  

197 countries towards tackling climate change 
effectively. So how would you overall commitment  

of the SDG and particularly the topic on hand of 
SDG7. Are there any areas you would like to gear  

up the dedication? This is your chance to call 
out and say these are the spaces and these are  

the countries, and this is what it needed to for 
him in the gaps towards tackling climate change? 

Thank you very much, Linda, and you know, 
it is, yes, it is hard and difficult.  

Our process is extraordinarily complex. I have 
worked on multilateral fora for most of my career,  

my professional life, and I have experienced 
working in many fields, but the field of climate  

change is really extremely complex. Why? Because 
it is cross-cutting. Because we are talking about  

a deep transformation of societies, deep 
transformation of the economy. It is not about one  

or two decision s. It is about really transforming 
the system that we have currently functioning in  

all the countries - developed and not developed. 
Therefore, it was a really important achievement  

what we managed to agree on in Glasgow. I 
have to say that if we look at the statements  

by the heads of state and government that 
over 120 who came to Glasgow that were there,  

the political level commitment is really present. 
We had heads of state and government expressing  

very clearly their demands, but also their 
commitment, their commitment to make more efforts  

for this transformation; commitments to make more 
efforts to provide a financing acknowledgement of,  

you know, the fact that the 100 billion needed to 
be provided by 2020, and they had not yet been -  

they're not yet there. So - and in the energy 
field, you know, all the nationally determined  

contributions which are the national climate 
change plans, all of them, talk about the energy  

transition. So, again, the point that I was making 
before, energy is at the centre of climate change,  

and energy is also at the centre of finding a 
solution, addressing effectively climate change.  

Now, Glasgow did manage to get an international 
community together to agree on scaling up clean  

power generation, energy efficiency measures, and 
for the first time accelerating the phasing out  

of unabated coal, and also the phasing out of in 
efficient subsidies for cell fuels. This was the  

first time in our process that was a breakthrough, 
and I think this is where we need to continue to  

put a lot of attention. In this transformation 
it will require a lot of support,  

as I was mentioning before, really to deploy the 
solutions. Why would we ask a developing country  

to not use coal if that is their resource if we 
do not provide them with the means and support  

to have an alternative, you know? This is the 
big job that we will have to make in order to  

make progress. This is where we need to put a lot 
of emphasis on in the coming years and beyond. 

Yes, so the missing ingredient: political 
will. So that is in. Really it is just a matter  

of maybe not just a matter, but we really 
do have to move that ambition into action,  

because the elements are in place. For the 
next ten minutes, I want us to do a deep dive  

into a just transition, and I'm going to start 
with you, Kwasi. First, please, you know, for  

the sake of the audience, just give us a common 
understanding of what you think a just transition  

is, and then what your country is doing 
to ensure that that actually takes place? 

I think when we consider the just transition, 
we've got to look at how transitions happened  

in the past. Very often, they've been lop-sided in 
the sense that benefits have accrued to a smaller  

number of people, and this transition has to be 
one which works for everybody, because as you  

remarked earlier, this is a common heritage, the 
Earth we live in belongs to everybody, so a just  

transition has to include everybody so we can 
have more resilience, more sustainable energy,  

and a more resilient and sustainable life on this 
planet as a shared heritage, as one human family.  

I think transitions in the past have not reflected 
that. They've not respected people's independence,  

they've not respected people's dignity, and we 
all know about these in history, and even now,  

and we are determined in making this transition 
that it is not going to be like what things have  

been in the past or the present. And it is very, 
very serious. It's a very serious commitment  

on all of us to be able to reach a resilient 
sustainable future that captures everybody. 

Fantastic. That absolutely makes sense.  

Patricia, I'm going to come to you next. 
Just picking up on that theme, we all know  

that the SDGs are interlinked, that achieving 
SDG7 impacts quite a few of the other SDGs,  

so which ones of the SDGs are you particularly 
keeping in mind to ensure the just transition? 

First of all, let me say that climate change 
impacts almost every SDG. If we talk about hunger,  

if we talk about education, health, clean air, 
clean water, economic opportunities - all of  

that is related to climate change. In fact, I 
was a member of the high-level panel who did the  

first report on the SDGs, and there was an 
important discussion where we should put  

climate change as a cross-drug the issue or a 
separate SDG. In the end, we decided to do both.  

We were worried if we did not include one specific 
SDG on climate change, it would be overlooked and  

not receive sufficient attention. But there 
was clear consciousness that, in fact, climate  

change has to do with all the different SDGs. We 
say that climate change is a threat multiplier,  

and, in this regard, climate change, yes, 
it affects our ability to be able to achieve  

all of those SDGs. Therefore, we have to 
recognise that addressing climate change and  

addressing SDGs is just one agenda. It is through 
that we have different ways we concentrate on  

the specifics of each of them, but it is one 
agenda. It is really the development agenda; it is  

the agenda for economic opportunity s. I think 
this is the key to addressing it in a positive  

way. It is not about a burden. It is not 
about something that is going to take us to  

a more difficult world. And that has to do 
also with what Secretary Kwarteng was saying.  

A just transition: yes, we need to put everyone 
on board. We can talk about energy and the energy  

transition, yes, there will be some areas that 
will be affected. We need to help the workers be  

able to transition to new opportunities. 
Why? Because they - the oil and gas industry,  

if we talk about cell fuels, or the coal industry, 
has a lot of people that depend on them, so it  

is not - it is really in nobody's interests that 
those people are left behind. We need to take them  

along. We need to think about their families as 
well, the people that are really making a living  

from that industry. But, we need to take them 
along to a better, actually, a better world,  

better opportunities for them as well.
Thank you very much. I'm going to come to you,  

Minister Svenja, with a little bit of an unfair 
question. I want to drill down on events that  

are still unfolding, and yet I'm going to ask 
what your view is on how the Russian events  

are going to impact the global energy transition.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine is on the  

face really struggling in the world because in 
the COVID-19 pandemic we don't talk about that  

any more, but there is still a worldwide pandemic. 
In this pandemic, we see rising prices - really,  

high rising price, on energy, on the food 
system. But we're talking about energy here,  

so, on energy, we have a high level 
on energy prices. And with this war,  

these prices are going up again, and that is 
really a problem for developing countries, because  

energy prices, they can't pay it any more, and 
they are, really, yes, they're dependent, on gas,  

on oil, and they need to pay the prices, and they 
don't have the money for that, so it is really,  

really a problem of a particular in the developing 
countries, and so we need also to help on that,  

and it - all the things we've been doing for 
years, what we see now, so we need to enhance,  

we need to speed up the help and the transition 
Patricia mentioned before. So it is even more  

urgent with this war; it is even more urgent to 
transform the energy systems of the world, and  

it is even more urgent to realise that climate 
change is still here and that we still have to  

work on that, so making countries more 
resilient, helping that they are not so  

dependent on fossil fuels, that is the future, and 
we need to invest in that future, and it is also,  

I'm still hopeful that can be also the 
perspective for developing countries, because  

they have renewable energies. They have all the 
possibilities to grow up renewable energies,  

and if they have enough renewable energies to help 
in their country, they can also invest in storage,  

and we could help them to invest in green 
hydrogen, for example, and, if they are able  

to produce green hydrogen for themselves, 
but in the future, maybe also for the export,  

that will help developing countries 
to have also an economic perspective.  

That is also interesting for industrialised 
countries because they need green hydrogen,  

so having this partnership, helping each 
other, is also an investment in the future. 

What you said resonates with me, and I work at 
grassroots in Kenya, and my area is clean cooking  

fuel, and I really appreciated those remarks. 
100%, a shift, a slight shift in gas prices has  

erased, really pushed us back, many, many years, 
when we're trying to transition people away from  

unsafe, un clean cooking fuel into new fuels 
now. A dollar shift in the gas prices mean  

food prices have gone up, so now people are making 
the choice: am I going to eat or am I going to  

buy this clean solution that Linda Davis is 
promoting? So 100% what we do here has this  

ripple effect, that is quite unimaginable, and 
it is just an absolute honour that the leaders  

are to be recognising these actions, because I do 
have the bad news from the area that I work in.  

Let's move on with how to provided. I'm sure 
we've put in the answers of the Sli.do question,  

and we will reveal your opinion shortly. Again, 
topic near and dear to me: we talked about  

women in parliament. This is our time to dig 
a little deeper into in particular topic. And  

maybe I will ask you to answer this in just 
about three minutes, so we have a chance to  

do some concluding comments. I will start with 
you, Patricia. On International Women's Day,  

you mentioned that women and girls need to be 
empowered and need to be involved at all levels.  

That was a powerful statement that you made. How 
dough see women particularly impacted with SDGs,  

SDG7, and what specifically can we do to ensure 
they're involved and included in a better way. 

As I mentioned before, one clear example of 
how women are affected is the issue of the  

clean cooking, and while climate change affects 
everyone - literally everyone in the world - it  

does not affect everyone equally. That means 
that people in a vulnerable situation, especially  

women and girls are extremely affected. The 
situation where you have a moment where there  

is drought, where there is the water scarcity. So 
women are the ones that normally then instead of  

walking for half an hour to get water for their 
houses, for their families, they need to walk  

maybe three hours, or four hours, and many times 
what happens is, and you will know better than me  

about that, but many times what happens is then 
that girls are taken out of school, because they  

are needed to help in the house. If we think about 
this reality, and then we look at the framework of  

decision-makers to address the different needs, 
having women in those tables that know that are  

sensitive, and really have deep knowledge of what 
the needs of women are, it is absolutely crucial.  

If you have somebody deciding the policies 
that will be implemented, or the way that  

the plans will be made, that has no clarity, that 
has really - these realities are not in mind,  

it will not be taken into account. 
Also, it will not be taken into account  

to see women also as solution-providers. They 
are the ones then that can provide the best way,  

the most efficient way to address those needs. So 
within our process, we have the parties actually  

have decided a long time ago already in 2012 that 
all the delegations should have women included.  

The fact is, up to this moment, what we see is, 
yes, in many rooms, quite a number of women,  

but when we could look at the groups of the lead 
negotiators, those who take decisions, the number  

of women reduces dramatically. I think there 
needs to be a very conscious effort to comply with  

this commitment that was already made, and that 
needs to be made. I'm talking about delegations  

to the UNFCCC, but that needs to be made at every 
single level of government, every decision-making  

process, in the private sector as well, there is 
a big and important push for private sector at the  

boards of the big companies to include women 
in their decision-making processes. It is not  

yet happening. Sometimes, I do feel that in the 
21st Century, we are looking at realities that  

belong to the last century.
Exactly. 

I think there needs to be a very conscious effort 
in this regard. And, to the argument that there  

are not enough women that have the experience of 
course, if women are not given the opportunity,  

they will never get the experience, but I can tell 
you, women are wonderful, and they are capable. 

Yes, yes! Fantastic. I just want to add a little 
bit of colour in some of the comments that  

Patricia has mentioned. Very many people are 
surprised when they learn that the simple act  

of cooking actually causes quite a lot of death. 
It is a direct correlation. I think that the WHO  

talks about four million people due to indoor 
house pollution. In my country of Kenya alone,  

it is about 25,000 women, mainly women and 
children, who die every single year simply because  

they cooked. The load you might see of a wood on 
a woman's head is 52kg, and the distance they walk  

is seven kilometres. Cooking for one hour in 
a smoky kitchen is equivalent of smoking four  

packets of cigarettes a day. This is a serious 
problem. The just transition must indeed include  

them. Thank you very much for bringing that issue 
into the limelight. I appreciate that a lot.  

So moving on to you, Minister Svenja, indeed, 
so, again, you talked about this before,  

so I'm just going to give you an opportunity 
to expound on your comments around how  

women and youth can fit into the decision-making 
process that Patricia said must include women. 

Can I underline what Patricia said before, 
what you said before. I think it is time  

to have feminist foreign policy and development, 
because we know from uncounted, countless studies  

that show that hunger, that poverty 
go down and stability increase  

if women have equal responsibilities. So, bring 
in more respect, more rights, and more resources  

to women. That is what needs to be done, and that 
needs to be in the centre of our policy too. I can  

just underline what Patricia said. It is time to 
bring, to empower more women. They are half of the  

population. If we don't put them on the focus, we 
don't go forward, so we need also successful women  

for the energy transition, and we see such a lot 
of heart-warming successful stories in the world.  

We see such a lot of powerful women and 
we need more of that, and that is when,  

from the German side want to do. They want a 
feminist development policy. They wanted to  

care about that. We want to bring that forward, 
and I hope that we get a lot of women with us  

to bring that forward, because it is important.
Kwasi, your comments, please, I asked to speak for  

three minutes, and I can't interrupt a panellist 
talking about women and energy transition! 

I think your testimony about the 
difficulties of women in particular  

cooking in large parts of the developing 
world, particularly in Africa and other places,  

I think really goes to the heart of the 
challenge. Because the hundreds of millions - I  

won't give away the answer! - of the hundreds of 
millions of people who kerblom access to energy,  

as pointed out, many will be in households 
led by women, where women providing food,  

providing disposable incomes such as there is, and 
so there is no way we can do that. There is no way  

we can reach these people without education. And 
particularly education of women. And that is why  

we are signatories in the UK to the Clean 
Energy, for the Empowerment of Women,  

C3-E, and I think that is important. In Glasgow, 
we were committed to the Gender Action Plan.  

There is no way we can do this without a 
just transition, everybody participating,  

but particularly in societies where women 
do have a large, a huge part to play,  

bigger than men in many instances.
Indeed, thank you very much. So,  

just I think we all know the answer to this, 
but we will go to the results of our Sli.do  

question very, very quickly, and then 
I will just ask for a quick one-minute  

closing remarks and that will mark the end of 
our panel, where we discussed how indeed we  

proceed. 91% got the answer correctly. I was 
expecting more than that! I will take 91%.  

659 million people still access to 
clean energy in 2022. A number that  

really should get us motivated to do what we 
need to do in our little parts of the equation.  

So to close the panel, I'm really going to 
ask the panellists in 30 seconds or less  

around - okay, really just a minute, and then 
to close the panel on how to proceed on SD G7. 

I think energy transition will require enormous 
efforts from all countries, and we discussed that  

before. And we should see it as an investment 
in the future, and in the future there is more  

prosperity, with more participation, with quality 
of life, and development is not possible without  

energy supplies, so achieving SDG7 is key to 
achieving all the other 16 sustainable development  

goals and so it is really an important point 
within the framework of the German G7 presidency,  

the German government is putting a strong 
focus on the topic of just transition. 

I think we've covered the subjects very, very 
well. I think SDG7 is all about delivery. We  

have a great COP26. We will have other COPs, but 
it is all about delivery, mobilising finance,  

education, and also deployment. And I think 
the 2020s will be marked by an incredible  

movement in all these areas. I think we can 
hint the targets. I'm very confident of that. 

Thank you. The message I would very much hope that 
you will take with you from these conversations  

is that achieving SDG7 and addressing climate 
change is possible, and, actually, it brings  

an opportunity for everyone. It is not easy, 
yes, nothing this important is easy. But we are  

the generation that has the opportunity to make a 
turning point in history, and in the wellbeing of  

humanity. So, if only if we all come together.
Thank you very much.


