Well, thank you. And thank you, Patrick. It 
has been great to co?host again here at the  

Foreign Office and with the Economics and Climate 
Ministry. That was it. I mean, how amazing? BETD  

2022. Two days. Just packed with discussions. 
Really rolling up your sleeves, getting things  

done. I also really appreciated the spirit. And I 
think that it really brought together those three  

pressing issues that we know are so interlinked. 
The issues of security, the climate crisis, and  

the energy transformation. And I think it's been 
an incredible, well, just gathering. Thanks to all  

of the participation here and online. So I thought 
that the hybrid approach and the participation,  

the polls, all of the things that made it really 
about today and being agile and transforming. 
 

So I think I wanted to share just a couple 
of quick thoughts ?? a couple of reflections,  

because, you know, I think when we started 
BETD back in 2015, the invitations were issued,  

we framed pretty much everything around or much 
around the switch from fossil fuels to renewables.  

Primarily in the context of climate and 
the climate crisis. Which, of course,  

is fundamental and remains front and center. And 
that certainly struck me as well in all of the  

discussions that I've had. But this year was 
different, I think, than the 2015 debates. Because  

these geopolitical advantages that come, that 
renewables offer, I think were very prominent. The  

decentralised. The independence. The ever?changing 
energy supply. I mean, it was just fundamental.  

And so that connection between renewables, 
energy security, the climate crisis piece  

I think is widely accepted. And that is an 
excellent foundation for us to move forward. 
 

And I think we all saw and felt when Vice 
Minister Demchenkov was here on the stage  

just what's that stake in this horrible war 
with Ukraine. And he made it just so clear  

how important it is to move away from fossil 
fuels. Obviously from Russia, but also,  

as we know, globally. We've got lots of evidence. 
We've got lots of energy. I wanted to bring into  

the room the discussions that happened here. I 
wasn't always in the room but had it going on my  

desk when I could. Just the importance of a just 
and inclusive energy transition. And I thought  

hearing the words. We know we have so much to 
do. We have to build up the pace and the scale,  

but having the voices of youth in the room from 
Uganda, from the Amazon about what is at stake  

for them. Having a focus here on gender. We know 
that actually gender equality is just integral,  

actually, to this transformation. And step 
by step moving it not as a separate thing,  

but actually fundamentally part 
of the programme. That should be a  

no?brainer. So those topics, I think, were also 
very much front and center. So I think, you know,  

we hold all the cards in our hands. We have the 
cost competitiveness. We have the access. We have  

the move forward on renewable energy storage. We 
know the needed policies. We know the capacity  

support that needs to happen. And so it really 
is, you know, in German, there is a saying,  

if not now, then when? When else but now? And 
I know that it is fundamentally complex to  

have all of these things come together. All of 
these different crises. But we have to do this.  

We have to stay focused to achieve this just, 
inclusive energy transition. Which we know is  

renewables ?? the push forward on green hydrogen, 
what that looks like, I think, is very exciting. 
 

So it won't stop here. You know, the BETD22 
will stop here in just a moment, but we'll have  

many conversations. Patrick mentioned, of course, 
the importance of the G7 presidency for Germany.  

But we also have a first Europe 
future energy dialogue, Jordan in may.  

The Petersburg Climate Dialogue here in 
July. And continued, of course, with the G7.  

I'm eager to engage with all of you. I know 
everyone from the German team is keen to continue  

on this action programme that we have. And I also 
would be remised without stopping just to thank,  

of course, Melinda for all of your diligence, 
your engagement of creating conversation.  

And I think that's so important in these moments 
when we've been so far apart from each other  

to come together, to listen to each other, to 
understand kind of what we're really trying to  

do. And also, last but not least, thanks to Marcus 
here from the Foreign Office who with their teams  

were the ones ?? also with many others, but, 
really, night and day is all I want to say. So  

thank you for your contributions as well. 
You know, this green sofa, it's a visual  

reminder of our ongoing dialogues. And I 
think it served us well here this year.  

So I'm actually now going to bid farewell to the 
green sofa, as it continues in its itinerary,  

in the name of the Energy Transition, and 
it's gonna be right back here at BETD23.  

So we're gonna do a little closing ceremony here. 
And announce that the BETD22 is closed. And now  

we'll move forward together to BETD23. 
So, here we go.  

So let's go forward together. We have so much  

to do. So little time. And we 
need everyone. Thank you very  

much. 
 
            


