Thank you very much, and, ladies and 
gentlemen, welcome to Berlin. What an honour.  

This conference, it's really a pleasure to see you 
all. Ladies and gentlemen, it is great to welcome  

you here in Berlin, and it is great that we can 
spend this day together. A conference of hope  

has now become a conference in the background 
of crisis and war, and these days, we see  

how dramatic the mistakes of the past have been. 
Of course, this is not only concerning Germany and  

Europe, but also the entire world, and Annalena 
Baerback has just talked about the foreign policy  

impact of the crisis, and I would like to 
underline that foreign policy and energy and  

climate policy are closely intertwined, and we pay 
- we attach importance to this in our government.  

We believe that our national efforts and 
the international consequences are to be  

a consistent policy, a consistent approach. This 
is the approach of this government, and it is the  

background of this conference which has been 
co-organised by the two ministries, and thank  

you very much - thanks to the staff and the many 
people who have been preparing this conference.  

And we as conference participants sometimes seem 
to forget how much work is behind such events.  

We have to book the flights, the hotels, 
and also prepare the rooms, and prepare the  

overall organisation of the day, so thank you for 
making this possible. Yes, it's your applause. 
 

We see that mistakes were made in the past. Over 
the past few years and decades, Germany has led  

its energy policy in a direction of dependence. 
This is first of all Germany's problem,  

but we may generalise, I believe. In saying 
that energy policy is not only economic policy,  

and if we think about human history, it has 
never been so entirely. Energy policy is always  

policy of interests of power, and, by extension,  

security interests. So this is very 
important, and it is hard to imagine that  

it was possible to forget this. It can only be 
explained by political attitude which says that  

there is no such thing as a policy of interest. 
We are living in a world that is dominated by  

markets, that are entirely determined by markets, 
and there is no more role for politics. The  

fewer taxes there is, the less economic 
intervention there is, the better for world.  

This has been the political approach over the 
past 30 years that has shaped globalisation.  

And these days, these weeks, 
have become a watershed  

in the way that we've seen that politics and 
policy is not best when there is no political  

intervention. We are now at a stage when politics 
has to reinvent itself, and restate its goals.  

We must be clear that politics has a role to 
play and the policy-makers may have to take  

important decisions, reducing Germany's 
energy dependency on Russia is very important.  

Energy dependence is about 50% of Russian - 
50% of Russian goal and gas. These decisions  

were not removed after Russia's annexation 
of Crimea, because, afterwards, we still  

went on with the Nord Stream 2 projects,  

after Russia in intervened in Syria, after 
there been military intervention in Georgia.  

It was not a clever idea to become dependent 
on this country. We now see that there is great  

political, a great war, right here in Europe, 
a war that has never been seen for 70 years.  

We now have to recognise that we did wrong in the 
past. This is the situation we are seeing now,  

and, for these reasons, Germany and Europe 
are now becoming independent from Russian  

fossil energy, step by step. This is necessary 
for geopolitical reasons, as I've just said. But  

this will also have a consequence. The consequence 
is both direct and indirect. The direct effect is  

that prices have risen, and that energy demand 
has surged. Speculation on the markets has also  

been driving prices. Also, the countries 
you're coming from, there is high inflation  

that is high above expectation, about 8% 
right now, and consumers and companies,  

countries, are suffering under the situation. 
Germany and Europe are wealthy. Our economies,  

despite the hardships and the difficulties  

involved in this, and despite all the concerns 
around inflation, as economies, as an economy,  

Germany can overcome this challenge, 
and the European economy can so too. But  

this may be addressed in the bilateral talks 
today. It is not very hard to see that forgoing  

Russian energy is important, but there will 
also be a gas and oil shortage on the world  

market first of all, so it is not very easy to 
replace Russian energy imports, but the idea  

is not to replace them because it's precisely a 
sanction against this war. If there is not enough  

oil and gas on the world market, there's 
also a shortage in your countries,  

so despite all the difficulties, and the burdens 
we have to bear, we see that it is not as easy  

for other countries with a stable economy to bear 
this burden. So we must pay attention, and see to  

it that our economic transition does not become 
a burden for other countries, so we must not  

push this burden over to other countries. It 
is very important to discuss this together.  

The indirect effects go far beyond 
this, they go far beyond high prices,  

which prices, which threaten economies. We 
also see that certain products may not be  

produced in sufficient quantities. Fertilisers 
need a lot of gas. If there is a gas shortage,  

we may also see a loss in the 
amount of fertilisers we need  

to secure global food security, and combined with 
losses of wheat from Ukraine, or from Russia,  

this can lead to famines, famines in 
certain countries, and famines are often  

the cause of political and social unrest. This 
conference takes place at a point in time when  

we have to understand, as world community, 
that a politically stable world is not  

on the brink of a turning point, and it is being 
threatened. So therefore it is so important  

that this conference takes place and that 
we co-ordinate our measures and strategies,  

that we support each other. Now, this is 
where the situation of the war in Ukraine,  

and the situation we are witnessing, its 
consequences in terms of energy policy,  

and the momentum of this conference which is to 
be a signal of hope, all of this is to be seen  

in the light of the consequences of the war 
which we have to address, and the answer is  

the expansion of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. We must boost energy efficiency and  

save energy wherever possible. We must use and 
apply technology in a way that saves energy.  

But we must also upscale renewable energy also 
in the short-term. Renewable tab renewable  

and above all also in the long-term. This is 
our key strategy. In this way - and this is  

not very easy to say because the background 
is very tragic, as we sit here today, as we  

have lunch later today, and see this conference - 
people are dying. People are being displaced and  

this is a very tragic conflict. So we must not be 
cynical if we talk about this, but the pressure  

for action can be seen very clearly, and we can 
also take many important and right decisions  

in these times. Addressing the structural crisis 
of our times, the very rapid global warming, and  

addressing humanitarian crises are now 
something we can do much faster if we  

address the geopolitical conflict which I believe 
should be the subject of this conference. Ladies  

and gentlemen, globalisation is understood to be 
a place where markets are acting, interacting,  

but this is coming under pressure, and we see 
that the world's political order is changing.  

Sometimes, globalisation is seen in terms of  

the markets, but there is also another aspect 
of globalisation, addressing problems together.  

There are trade conflicts, there are new 
regional interests, certain countries, that  

connect economic activity to local 
activity. Germany and Europe are  

creating resilient strategies - infrastructure, 
semiconductor production, hydrogen production,  

and the idea is to bring these technologies back 
to Europe, even if it is more expensive than in  

other parts of the world, so there is a tendency 
of deglobalisation, but a globalisation that  

believes that the lowest standard is 
always the best economic choice is wrong.  

But what is important is that we co-operate, 
that we agree at a political level  

what sustainability is all about, that we 
agree on the important values to be protected,  

and at these times, we see that climate 
neutrality and the expansion of a green economy  

are closely intertwined with peace and security. 
... energies tend to create economic monopolies,  

and also political monopolies. Monopolies 
have to be defended, so fossil energies  

create authoritarian tendencies. Renewable 
energies, however, are theoretically at least,  

designed to to create energy supply that is 
socially just. The sun doesn't belong to anyone.  

So if we are clever, we will create the right 
energy policy that will ensure prosperity and  

boost prosperity while protecting peace in the 
world. This is what this conference is all about.  

Thanks for coming to Berlin. I'm looking forward 
to the talks, and our discussions. Thank you


