So I'm happy to welcome here Dr Simone Peter, 
President of the German Renewable Energy  

Federation. Thank you for joining me today. 
Thank you for having me here. 
 

I wanted to get started with our questions. 
What implications does the war in Ukraine  

have for the energy transition? Is it going to 
delay the global transformation towards renewable  

energies? I want to ask about how it will be in 
Europe and how it will be here in Germany? 
 

Yes, the war in Ukraine dramatically 
demonstrates the high risk and high costs of  

dependency on fossil fuels, and, again, the 
danger of nuclear energy, as in Chernobyl and  

other places. The war has, beside the horrible 
consequences, this war includes a - a very  

direct impact of security and affordability on 
the energy supply, and, in order to reduce and  

overcome this dependency and imports from Russia, 
the German government already has discussed  

and also agreed on new energy partnerships 
with other countries, but especially a massive  

acceleration on renewable energies in Germany and 
in Europe. Europe Europe tab Europe Europasaal  

Europasaal it ... and affordable energy 
supplier, both regionally, and globally,  

and renewable energies are peace energies. They're 
peace energies, and freedom energies and they  

guarantee reliable energy supply independent from 
international crisis. And they prevent new crises,  

if we mobilise all kinds of renewable energies to 
solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, and hydropower,  

and now, for the sake of future generations, and 
the Paris Agreement climate goals, the future  

must be based on renewables and we have to start 
today, globally, nationally, and regionally. 
 

But in order to get us there, what kind 
of policies or frameworks do we need  

so that we can XML rate the energy transition on 
a global scale? How can the European Union, or  

Germany accelerate the transformation? What do we 
need to do here at home and in other countries? 
 

First of all unleash the affordable fluctuating 
renewables like wind and solar. In Germany alone  

we need 700 gigawatts until 2045, and along with 
this massive expanding of the fluctuating sources,  

we need flexible units in addition. This means 
biogas, hydropower, power to like a clean water  

power, for consumers, and generations side, and 
the new electricity market needs to be fully based  

on the new systems Serbs setting role of renewable 
energies. In Germany we're around 50% of renewable  

energies in the grid, and the whole system has 
to be changed and we need an adjustment of this  

framework. The German Renewable Energy Federation 
published a study of integration of fluctuating  

renewable energies and it shows that electricity 
sector is domestic, more decentralised,  

and fully renewable based, and it is possible, 
possible together with citizens, communities.  

We can organise a new energy transition, 
but we need other regulatory frameworks, and  

we have to go on with the renewable energies. 
One important point is we don't need bridge  

technologies like fossil gas any more. We have 
to invest in the renewable energies and have to  

phase out of fossil and nuclear energy as soon as 
possible. The future is 100% renewable energy. 
 

That's right. This is an important question. 
We always save the best for the last:  

what role does gender equality play 
in this transformation? Do you see a  

specific role for women in advancing the energy 
transformation here? In Germany and abroad? 
 

It is a very, very important point. Enquired 
to achieve the global energy transformation,  

all talents and forms must be included to 
drive innovation, and the gender diversity  

still is widely missing. If we want 
the energy transition to progress,  

and to a future-orientated approach is needed, 
then we need the gender equality and the gender  

justice. We have so many impressive women and 
girls in the world, they show that women have a  

voice, that women can and must play a central 
role for this energy transition, to, ja, for  

the acceptance and active transport for renewable 
energies and of course for climate protection and  

for the preservation of our wonderful planet. 
Thank you so much, Dr Simone Peter. Strong  

women - you're one of them. Thank 
you for being here in the session.


