and joining me here in person is Dr. Gunar Hering. 
He is the COO and member of the Executive Board of  

an international renewable energy company based 
here in Germany. Hello and welcome. Thanks so much  

for joining me today. 
Hello. 
 

So we had two really riveting sessions about 
green hydrogen earlier today. One in the  

Weltsaal and one in the Europassal. And I want 
to ask you a key question. One of your takeaways  

from the sessions that we heard earlier 
today. What are the key success factors  

for a rapid build?up of green hydrogen? 
Thank you for having me. Thank you for  

providing me with this question. Just a few words 
up front. We have always taken the long?term view  

and we always asked ourself, what will 
be needed in the future to reach the 2050  

Net Zero goal? And this was already ten years 
ago to build the first green hydrogen facility  

in Europe. At that time, there was no suitable 
commercial electrolyzer available so we designed  

and built the first electrolyzer ourselves. 
Afterwards, many viewed green hydrogen  

as an inefficient, very costly technology 
compared to grey hydrogen. And some even  

called it the champagne of the energy 
transition. But look at where we stand today.  

Natural gas prices have increased 10?fold. 
CO2 prices in Europe have increased 25?fold,  

and at the same time, cost of renewables 
actually dropped by a factor of 3. 
 

And as we just saw, green hydrogen is one 
of the top topics here at the conference  

and on the panel. Thus, when we look forward 
and ask ourselves, how do we actually move  

from ambition to action? We can now rely on a cost 
efficient improvement in technology. When it comes  

to the question of the scale?up, we believe that 
there are three factors that are key to that. 
 

First, we need efficient international cooperation 
frameworks to match supply and demand. Secondly,  

we need smart policies to ensure a 
green and just transition. And third,  

we need low?cost financing for that. Let me just 
highlight a few examples that I heard today that  

actually talk especially to those three points. 
Where we see very encouraging initiatives. 
 

So first, unit question of international 
cooperation, let me spotlight the H2 Global  

Foundation that has created together with the 
support of the German Ministry of Economics  

and Climate a facility that allows to 
aggregate demand, short?term demand from  

consuming countries. In this case Germany. 
With long?term investments and the  

stability needed for those long?term investments 
from international producing countries. 
 

This is very encouraging because it actually 
allows to de?risk supply and demand at the  

same time and thus generating the opportunity 
to generate low?cost financing, which benefits  

all. In the future, what we would like to see is 
that such a facility will also be available to all  

European Member States in a co?operative manner. 
When it comes to the second point on smart policy,  

we have to say that everything starts with a clear 
vision. And a clear political will. And on that,  

we're actually very honoured to be in the position 
to work very closely with the Namibian government.  

With Minister Alweendo just being on the 
previous panel. And to help Namibia be a  

leading green hydrogen exporter to the 
world. That alone so not sufficient. 
 

What it actually takes is governments like Namibia 
did run very efficient process in order to build  

up such an economy. In this case, a very efficient 
RFP process, which we as a participant and were  

selected the winner, luckily, was a very 
efficient one compared to other countries. 
 

Congratulations on being selected. 
That's fantastic. And thank you so much,  

Dr. Gunar Hering for joining me in 
this final studio session of the day.


