Welcome back to the Europasaal. I'm joined by 
Jochen Hauff, Energy Policy and Sustainability  

For BayWar.e. what does the RE stand for? 
Renewable energy. It used to be written out  

but they thought the titles are too long anyway 
as you noticed, and they thought the acronym is  

sufficient. Thanks for having me.
Thank you for joining us today.  

We heard two keynote speeches this morning. 
We had a great Green Sofa about SDG7 which  

focuses on access to affordable, clean energy. 
What with the renewable energy industry do  

and what is BayWar.e's concrete 
contribution in this respect? 
 

I think the industry and we all have the 
responsibility to put all these policies,  

the objectives that also Kwasi Kwarteng mentioned, 
COP26, consensus of moving forward at accelerated  

speed and put that into concrete action and 
roll out systems to the people who need the  

energy. I think the question of energy access 
has been mentioned on this panel repeatedly,  

and I think that is something that is very 
important as well. So, bringing this together,  

deploying renewable energy and making it 
accessible meaning also afford able is a key  

topic. So, standardising and scaling up 
in terms of realising economies of scale,  

realising economies of standardisation, is key 
to bring it to the people, but also to make it  

affordable and thus accessible. So 
only collaboration and partnership,  

even though that is mentioned repeatedly 
here, won't do it. We still need to build  

this stuff, and it needs to be affordable. 
Collaboration, partnerships are incredibly  

important. We've talked about them a bunch. The 
theme you mentioned this year is from ambition  

to action. So I wonder, can you tell me about 
a specific action that BayWar.e has taken? 
 

Partly, it's our core business to build 
projects and we've done so also in  

hard er, or more risky areas from a European 
perspective. We are operating in 30 countries with  

3,300 people, but we are making only first steps 
in the really - where it really matters if it  

comes to the markets in the developing world. 
We are also access to energy and SDG7 is key.  

One example, a concrete one I can point to 
been which is something we implemented again  

with partners, not alone, was one of the largest, 
one of the largest offgrid diesel hybrid systems  

that we built for an industrial company in 
Mali. So that was challenging. Yes, even  

our modules got burned in the process. There was 
an attack on the construction site. Fortunately,  

we could recover and rebuild it. That was an 
example of a larger scale development, project,  

that we built in a very difficult setting.  
You talked about energy access. Last night,  

my final session of the day, we looked at energy 
access also from a perspective of women in Africa  

when it comes to clean cooking before do you 
have any examples from that department? 
 

I wish we had more. The topic is I think something 
we again address with partners. We have supported,  

I don't know how many of you know it, Google 
"remote energy", it is a great NGO from  

the US, and they focus on training installers, 
especially female installers, in under privileged  

societies. Therapy not only focused on Africa, but 
also doing this in native American communities in  

the United States, but also in Africa, and that 
is, for example, was the core focus of our new  

year's donation last year, and we will continue 
to avail of our partnership with them. We try to  

work on this bottleneck of having qualified 
installers available - a selfish reason - but  

we can combine it with the important aspect of 
empowering women to take up these technical jobs  

also in societies where that might not be 
the first intuition, so that is a thing,  

it is a small thing that we can do.
It is a small thing but important thing.  

I love that you talk about training the trainers. 
I'm going to host a panel on that later today. I  

have one last question before you go. I was 
reading this morning on Twitter, actually,  

the head of the UN Word Food Programme said 
just yesterday that the war in Ukraine is  

"a catastrophe on top of a catastrophe that is 
going to have a global impact" "beyond anything  

we've seen since world war 2". Those are pretty 
big words. Is there a conflict of land use for  

something like solar energy and food production? 
There seems to be on the surface. This can be  

tackled with good planning, building plans that 
you wouldn't put it on the most fertile soil  

you have around, so you go to areas where 
the fertility is less, and the impact is  

limited. That's the first-level response. 
The second is agri types, a combination of  

growing and continuing to grow all sorts 
of crops, and combine that with an electric  

harvest, combine that with a solar plant, 
either by spacing the panels in between,  

or by elevating them somewhat so that special 
crops that need shading or partial shading like  

coffee and others, can be grown underneath, and 
actually were helping the hydrological situation,  

where reducing evaporation, we can 
collect rain waters on panels and  

collect it and funnel it back to the area. 
Our mother company is 100 years old and an  

agricultural co-operative. It's in our DNA not 
to fight the food producers because they're our  

key customers from BayWar.e traditionally.
I want to thank you or joining me today.  

Thank you to have so much. 
Thank you for your time.


