How to finance measures needed to 
achieve global Net Zero carbon emissions  

is one of the most intensive?debated aspects 
of the climate debate. How can State funds be  

leveraged to maxemise private capital 
investment for the energy transition?  

The timeline for carbon neutrality set out in the 
Paris Agreement does not account for the higher  

burden of the adaptation on less?developed 
energy systems. Industrialised nations must  

ramp up support for developing regions to close 
the financing gap on sustainable development. 
 

And welcome back, everybody, to this final 
panel here in the Weltsaal. Besides the closing  

ceremony, of course, on finance and how we get to 
Net Zero. And we heard it there. This is one of  

the most hotly?debated topics when we talk about 
the journey to boosting renewables and getting  

to Net Zero. IRENA, the International Renewable 
Energy Agency, most recent energy world transition  

outlook estimates success in bringing CO2 
emissions to Net Zero by 2050 depends on  

scaling up investment by at least 30%. Compared 
to where we are now. Possibly you have even higher  

discrepancies. But persistent barriers remain. 
Whatever estimates you're using. Particularly in  

connexion with smaller projects. Which account for 
nearly half of all renewable energy undertakings.  

So how do we address these barriers and achieve 
a major realignment of capital flows? That is  

our central question in this panel today. 
How can State funds be effectively used to  

leverage private capital investment 
for construction of renewable?based  

energy grids and developing countries, many of 
them already bearing a very heavy debt burden,  

require capital, not only for mitigation but 
also, of course, for far?reaching adaptation.  

How can projects that contribute to resilience and 
sustainability be structured to attract investors  

who, of course, are looking for returns? And 
finally, what is the role of blended finance  

in closing the SDG financing gap? Those 
are some of the topics that we're going  

to be talking about here on this panel. And we 
have eminent speakers with us to discuss them.  

I will keep the introductions brief, as always, 
in order to maxemise our time for discussion. 
 

And I begin with Vice Minister for International 
Affairs and Japan's Ministry of Economy,  

he is Naoshi Hirose, and he has had a long career, 
including leading positions in energy policy. It's  

also a pleasure to welcome, joining us Aminath 
Shauna, Minister of Environment, Climate Change,  

and Technology from the Republic of Maldives. 
Great to have you with us. Thank you so much.  

Also a pleasure to welcome Kandikuppa Sreekant, 
with 34 years of experience in the area of  

long?term financial planning. Also pleased to 
welcome Suahasil Nazara, Vice Minister of Finance  

for the Republic of Indonesia. Online, Rhian?Mari 
Thomas joins us. And finally a pleasure to welcome  

Werner Hoyer. He is serving his second 
term as President of the European  

Investment Bank and under his leadership, the 
bank has also consolidated its position as a  

leading multilateral provider of climate finance 
worldwide. And we begin, in fact, with a short  

keynote from you, Dr. Hoyer. And I'll just note in 
handing over that the EIB made waves by announcing  

already three years ago that it would end 
support for fossil fuel projects and mobilise 1  

trillion Euros for climate and environment finance 
in the decade to 2030. So, please, take it away. 
 

Well, thank you very much for this very 
warm welcome. It's a pleasure to be  

with such distinguished colleagues here on 
the stage. Talking about an issue that is so  

incredibly important. You must know that ?? 
you should know that the EIB, the EU Bank,  

is the largest multilateral bank in the world, 
and this is particularly true when it comes to  

green finance. We've been the climate 
bank of the EU for a long time,  

but what few know, since you'll refer to the 
mobilisation of private funds, the leverage.  

We issued the first bond ?? green 
bonds ever in 2007. And at that time,  

that was considered a lunatic idea. And this 
lunatic idea has now mobilised probably close  

to 1,000 billion Euros on the capital markets 
in the support of the green transition. 
 

We invested early in offshore wind farms. Nowadays 
floating wind farms which are particularly  

effective. Battery technologies. Green hydrogen 
projects. And in 2019, we made that quantum leap  

forward by adopting an ambitious plan to 
become the EU's climate bank. That was also  

the day we said we'll move out of the 
financing of fossil fuel products. 
 

As part of this, we set ourselves clear targets. 
50% of our lending should go into environmentally  

clean climate projects from 2025 onwards. 
Something that we have achieved already last year.  

So four years ahead of schedule. We also committed 
to align all our lending to the Paris goals,  

which means that we no longer invest in activities 
that do significant harm. That's the terminology.  

Do significant harm to the environment. We 
have already implemented this as well already.  

The first, by the way. We launched an ambitious 
adaptation plan to address the unfortunately often  

forgotten but crucially important component in the 
fight against climate change, climate adaptation.  

So when it comes to our work on the green, the EIB 
is very much an engineering?driven institution.  

You may find us many engineers with us as you will 
find bankers in the bank's offices in Luxembourg  

and elsewhere. The idea behind it is very 
simple. With our financing, we want to promote  

innovation as well as technology transfer. 
We always think innovation, climate,  

and development together. They 
belong into one box and not in two,  

in three separate boxes. I'm convinced that in 
the end, we will only be successful in our fight  

against climate change if we manage to combine 
these three elements. If we mobilise others,  

most notably, the private sector, to do so as 
well. In the last 15 years, every acute crisis  

has become a reason to put climate protection 
on the back burner. The window of opportunity  

for timely decarbonisation has become smaller 
and smaller. We are right now exactly in this  

situation where the people are hiding behind the 
virus or the situation that's happening in Ukraine  

when it comes to climate action. It's absolutely 
critical that does not happen again. While I see  

that some people take the opportunity, I 
believe they will remain lonely voices. 
 

Because we are seeing more clearly than 
ever what our reliance on fossil fuel means,  

not just for the climate challenge but 
also to shift our strategic dependency  

on others. The only way to reduce this is to 
push ahead with a green transition. And as part  

of Team Europe where we co?operate, of course, 
particularly closely with the European Commission,  

we're keen to work with partners around the 
globe. We believe the solution of the climate  

issue can never be national or regional or local. 
Nor can it be regional in Europe. It must be seen  

as a global challenge, and this is why we need to 
cooperate on a global scale to promote innovative,  

sustainable development solutions worldwide. 
So the challenges are global. So must be  

the solution. I'm looking 
forward to our good discussion. 
 

Thank you very much. As we all are. And I would 
like to stay ?? normally, I would now go to the  

countries, but I think I'd like to stay with the 
big?picture view for a moment and then come to the  

countries, if that works for everybody. And as 
mentioned, significant barriers do still impede  

the flow of capital into renewable solutions. 
Now, least a lack of knowledge on the mechanics  

of green finance. So I'd like to ask both Ms. 
Thomas and Mr. Sreekant to please talk a little  

bit about the barriers that you're seeing in 
practise and tell us how the organisations  

that you represent are contributing to potential 
solutions. And I'll ask you to weigh in again,  

Mr. Hoyer, after the other two have spoken, to 
add if you see additional points. And I'll begin  

with Ms. Thomas, if I may. 
Well, thank you very much.  

So at the Green Finance Institute, identifying 
the barriers to the deployment of capital towards  

real economy solutions, and then co?developing 
the financial interventions to overcome those  

barriers with industry experts, finance providers, 
and political representatives is our very purpose.  

So in order for private finance to move, it 
clearly needs to find commercial opportunities.  

And we as former bankers can play a valuable 
role where mostly at this point finance by  

philanthropic donors so we're not constrained 
by the short?term profitability targets that  

we would have if we were still working in large 
commercial organisations. And so that enables  

us to do the painstaking, bottom?up work of 
identifying those very granular barriers that  

are stopping the transactions from happening. 
So in particular, we're focusing on financing  

the energy efficiency of buildings and the 
decarbonisation of road transport. There are  

projects that we've started in the UK, but we're 
keen to expand across the continent of Europe.  

We're also developing nature?based solutions and 
hosting the task force on nature?related financial  

disclosures. We're developing a financial 
instrument to channel capital towards climate  

smart infrastructure in middle?income countries. 
If I may just focus on that for a second,  

my colleague in Cape Town has been working very 
closely with the South African banks and local  

investors to develop and finance a green guarantee 
facility. That's been structured in their requests  

to a de?risking facility that enables them, the 
local banks, to finance climate infrastructure  

projects using local domestic pension and 
institutional funds. And the barrier we identified  

with them was that these local pools of capital 
need to invest in investment?grade securities  

such as government bonds, for example. 
And that often exempts them from investing  

in much?needed energy, waste, and water 
infrastructure in response to climate change.  

So work on the facility to address this issue. It 
is under way. We are also doing the feasibility  

studies to identify other jurisdictions 
where it could also be a possible solution. 
 

Clearly, the barriers to investment vary by 
jurisdiction, by industry sector, but I think  

point that I'm trying to get across is it requires 
granular and painstaking work to identify them,  

and then as we've just heard, a huge 
amount of collaboration, cross?sector,  

cross?geography, to find the right solutions. 
May I just ask one follow?up? And it relates to  

something that I often hear when I'm talking to 
people in the financial area. Namely that there is  

sometimes a lack of capacity to develop bankable 
project proposals. And is that something you're  

seeing in your work? And is it also something that 
you are addressing or how do you think it can best  

be dealt with? And, of course, it gets back to 
the point I made at the outset, that, in fact,  

there are often barriers in 
connection with smaller projects,  

including many that relate to renewables. 
I'll make two points, if I may, very quickly.  

The point about bankable projects is quite 
often because those projects require equity and  

not bank credit. And so quite often we find that 
developers are looking in the wrong place at the  

wrong types of finance in order to get this 
projects going. That's not always the case,  

but that is quite often the case when 
we hear this lack of bankability.  

The second point I'd like to make ?? 
and this is purely anecdotal ?? the  

work we've been doing in South Africa over 
the last year and a half with the banks,  

we have uncovered over a billion pounds worth of 
shovel?ready climate smart infrastructure projects  

that the banks would like to underwrite but 
they can't distribute those securities to the  

local domestic pension and institutional investors 
because they're not investment grade. So certainly  

in a country like South Africa, which obviously 
has a huge requirement to decarbonise, we're  

finding that there are projects, but we actually 
need to find the right de?risking mechanisms,  

which is where working with an organisation like 
EIB and other multilateral development banks  

could provide part of the solution to 
help crowd in that private capital. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me 
go to Mr. Sreekant now. 
 

Thank you. If we look at the ESU bond 
market, last year there was about 853  

billion in issuances. Roughly 50% of them were 
green bonds. If you look at India from where I  

come from, India renewable project companies, 
developers, they raised about 9.4 billion last  

year from the green bond market. And the Indian 
government has also announced in the budget that  

the sovereign will issue a green bond to 
raise funds for the climate projects. 
 

Now, I am from a utility. And, you know, 
as an issue, what do we see as the barriers  

to these markets? First and foremost, there 
are different taxonomies, I think the EIB has  

done a great job giving a standard. But there are 
many different ?? what is a green bond or a green  

financing? The first question is that. How do we 
attract that pool of capital? And second is that  

there is not much of an incentive to go for the 
green bond because the pricing differentiation  

is not really that much. So particularly the 
small ones will feel that, okay, what is the  

point doing the additional compliances at all? 
Do I get a reduction in the cost? And finally,  

I think there is no requirement on the part of the 
investors to allocate a certain amount of their  

capital to these projects. I think that is one of 
the reasons that perhaps if there is a change or  

there is a mandate, you know, for example, there 
is talk of green ratio. If you have mandates I  

think at least a minimum purchase obligation. 
So if some such thing is there then there is a  

greater flow of funds to these green projects. 
So, Werner Hoyer, let me ask you to respond  

to what we've just heard and then 
we'll move on to the countries. 
 

Well, I can fully subscribe to what I've just 
heard. The key thing is that we as a multilateral  

bank which is endowed only very, very little by 
the shareholders of the bank. These are the 27  

Member States of the European Union who are quite 
clumsy when it comes to paying cash into the bank.  

But they give a guarantee call of a capital 
guarantee. Beyond that, we need to get the money  

from the capital markets. We issue bonds every 
year between 70 and 100 billion Euros, and we  

must place them on the markets. That requires the 
trust of the investors. That's our main capital,  

the trust of the investors. And that means 
the investors must be sure that, for instance,  

what is labeled "green" is green. And therefore 
we found out pretty swiftly after 2007 when we  

issue the first green bonds that the investors 
would look very closely at what's in the package.  

Is it really green or is it just a cheating that's 
going on? So green, cheating was the name of the  

game. Or green?washing to put it more mildly. So 
that's what triggered the necessity to establish  

standards. Green bond standards. Agreed in those 
cities and the European Union and other places.  

And which are now practically world practise. And 
this is key because now we go beyond green. It's  

also ESG standards in general. These must be 
observed. That leads now to a discussion about  

so?called taxonomy. 
Yeah. 
 

Which I think is a great idea. As long as it 
doesn't develop into a bureaucrat monster. But the  

basic idea is correct, give reassurances to the 
investors. We will never be able to finance our  

Paris goals or the SGGs with states' budget moneys 
alone. We need the private sector for this. 
 

Let me ask you to say another word about 
the taxonomy. We have an audience question  

on that point. I was waiting to bring it in until 
someone mentioned this rather impenetrable term,  

I must say. Taxonomy for most people, what 
are they talking about? Many people view it  

as a real watershed moment. Just tell us three 
sentences about why that is or is not the case. 
 

First, when I mentioned the word taxonomy that 
came from the European Union. Why taxes? A very  

good Greek word, order. Has a very good idea 
behind this. We need to bring order into this  

market. I think that is perfectly okay. But you 
need to have reassurances for the investors. And  

that, I think, we have ?? some 
of us have learned the hard way,  

because if you have one or two or 
three experiences with green cheating  

then you have ?? we all have a problem in placing 
our bonds and raising the capital that we need.  

I mean, we have a balance sheet of something 
like $700 billion and the capital injection is so  

small is that we just cannot risk to lose 
the momentum of the trust of our investors.  

This is why we then also ?? to come back 
to another issue that you have raised. 
 

The development of projects. Making projects 
bankable. This is normally not something a  

commercial bank would see at the centre of 
their activities. For us, it is. This is  

why we are engineering bank. We get political 
objectives. We are an instrument of policies of  

the European Union. Energy policies, foreign 
policies, development policy. So we must be  

put into the state to be able to help to 
develop projects and then to make them bankable.  

That can be by risk sharing. That can be by 
quality controls. And this is why I'm sometimes  

surrounded only by engineers and life 
science experts. And that's very healthy. 
 

Thank you very much. Let's very quickly 
get our audience poll up and running,  

if I may ask our technical team to please 
give that to us on screen. Here it is. And the  

question reads as this. What are the chances that 
framework measures such as the EU taxonomy will  

substantially increase the impact that sustainable 
investments have on climate mitigation?  

So essentially, does this offer a potential 
solution to green?washing and the problem  

of ?? that is facing so many investors, of trying 
to figure out whether a so?called green instrument  

truly is respecting ESG factors. So we're 
going to come back to that in a minute. 
 

I would now like to move on to hear from 
the countries. And for our three country  

representatives on the panel, the question to 
you would be: Based on your country's experience,  

what are some of the best practises in how State 
funds can be effectively deployed to maxemise  

private capital investment in the build?up of 
renewables?based energy grids, for example? And  

so clearly this is getting to that de?risking and 
also blended finance that we were talking about.  

And I think I'm going to go to the Maldives first, 
if I may. Because I think all of us are very well  

aware that you face a particularly 
critical situation in your land. 
 

Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here. The 
Maldives, I think most of the people would  

know as a holiday destination, but we are a 
country, like you said, 1,200 islands. Most  

of the islands are just about a metre above 
sea level. The reports that are coming out  

of IPCC is alarms. Our islands are eroding. 
We are running out of fresh water. So for us,  

climate mitigation is as important as adaptation. 
We see investments in renewable energy as part  

of our adaptation plans. We are 
a small island development state,  

but we also have a growing demand for energy use 
as well. And we almost entirely depend on imported  

fossil fuels in meeting our energy needs. 
We spend about $58 million a year on electricity  

subsidies, and we spend about $500,000 million 
on importing fossil fuels as well. So for us,  

we clearly see this is a business case to shift 
to renewables. In addition to the climate benefits  

of it as well. The Maldives announced to 
become a carbon?neutral country in 2009.  

And today ?? since then until today, we have 
installed about 40 megawatts of renewable energy  

throughout the country. And in two years, 
this will increase to 60?plus as well. And  

our first PPA was signed in 2011 to 25 cents. Just 
yesterday, we signed another PPA to just 9.8 cents  

per kilowatt hour renewable energy. 
The challenges for us in securing  

energy security is enormous. So up?front 
investments are needed for us to transition to  

green energy. But despite our challenges, despite 
our climate challenges and adaptation challenges  

as well, we do have a target to reach Net Zero by 
2030. And several efforts are being made towards  

utilising available renewable energy sources 
to generate electricity in our country. We have  

sunshine in abundance. So we want to transition 
our economy to one based on sunshine rather than  

fossil fuels. And we have the presence 
of EIB, ADB, and World Bank, and  

we are using our government funds to accelerate 
investments in renewable energy by investing in  

things like home solar programmes as well. 
So how can governments facilitate this  

and mobilise funds by combining through the 
private sector? We need to invest in great  

distribution networks. We are investing 
in battery energy storage systems.
 

We are also investing in energy management systems 
in a way that renewable energy can be incorporated  

into the system. So in the Maldives, the way the 
private sector investment is structured investment  

framework, which blankets investors from any 
long and short?term risks in doing business in  

the Maldives. So the government will continue 
the efforts to facilitate investors through  

supportive policies and incentives as well. 
So finance is really the key to realise our  

ambition towards a cleaner and more sustainable 
energy sector to ensure energy security  

as well as reducing our emissions. 
Thank you very much, Minister Shauna.  

Let me go now to Vice Minister Hirose to 
talk about the perspective from Japan. 
 

Thank you very much. I think it's no secret 
global challenges need global action and  

global coordination. Japan is fully committed to 
maxemise, you know, the amount of renewable energy  

to be used. And for investment to flow, I think 
definitely there is a need for good coordination  

between the public sector and the private 
sector. And I think, you know, the key words  

will be probably to cope with the uncertainty 
and raise, you know, the level of predictability,  

I think is the key. So, for example, I mean, if we 
are working in the Asian region, including Japan,  

how to introduce renewable energy. There are 
kind of specific conditions or constraints to  

introduce wind power or solar energy 
because of the specific geographical or  

methodical conditions. So, innovation, we 
can overcome that. So here I think there  

is a role for government money working as a 
catalyst for promoting private investment.  

And then promoting innovation. So that's the 
reason why the Japanese government has established  

a green fund amounting to 2 trillion yen. Which is 
to assist specific projects by the private sector  

over the next ten years. With a 
specific commitment or target date.  

And which will go from the R&D phase to the 
mobilisation projects and to the implementation. 
 

So, for example, a classical example would 
be actually the floating offshore wind power,  

which is a promising technology. It will be 
used in areas where there is no benefit of  

shallow waters, for example. And now in the face 
of the commercialisation, still I think there  

would be instances, you know, where the demand 
for finance is increasing, but there is the  

risk for signal companies to invest. And so here, 
we are in the process of discussing with the  

financial sector about some kind of risk?sharing 
scheme, you know, where the financial sector  

or the companies, you know, who have done R&D or, 
you know, who would like to use the technology can  

have a ?? can co?operate together to promote the 
financing. So that's what I see on the R&D side. 
 

Now, in terms of the grid. In Japan, we have 
not seen as much investment in interregional  

transmission lines as we have expected. And one of 
the reasons we observed was that in our previous  

system, the cost of establishing this grid was 
borne on both sides ?? both ends of the transition  

line. Which means, you know, those areas who 
have a high potential for renewable energy had  

a high cost. That was an egg/chicken, chicken/egg 
problem. We changed our legislation two years ago.  

Now we are in the process of putting together kind 
of a master plan taking into account, you know,  

the huge potential of renewable energy. And then 
we establish a system, you know, that the cost of  

establishing the grid will be borne, you know, by 
Japan as a whole. And also we have introduced the  

kind of revenue cap system, where, you know, the 
pricing will be ?? will take into account the cost  

and also a system that can incentivize cost 
reduction. It could create incentives and  

credibility for the private sector to invest. 
So this is the kind of not toe that we are  

embarking on right now. Working together with 
the public sector and the private sector,  

including government funding for R&Ds. 
Thank you very much. And let me go to  

Vice Minister Nazara also for 
a response on the same point. 
 

I think the first thing the government must 
do is show commitments from the public funds.  

From the spending point of view, for a country 
like Indonesia, it includes the reduction of  

the fossil?based subsidy. And we have been 
trying to do that in the last five years.  

But, of course, whenever the international oil 
price is at this level, it's becoming more and  

more difficult for countries like Indonesia, 
but that does not stop us from having the  

big?picture, the right commitment for the subsidy 
reduction. The other thing is that to ?? also, the  

government must show the commitment. In Indonesia, 
we do what we call the climate budget taking  

for public funds. For every single 
ministry in Indonesia, we are asking them  

to show which part of your budget can ?? that 
you allocate for the mitigation and adaptation. 
 

In the last five years as well, we found out that 
it's only about 34% of what Indonesia actually  

needs that can be allocated by the public funds, 
by the State budget. So we need to encourage the  

private participation, as you said earlier. Now, 
the government must also show this not only from  

the spending side but also from the financing 
side. Indonesia ?? EIB if the first green,  

Indonesia is the first green ?? we issued the 
first green ?? we combined green and ?? bonds  

for the first time in the world. That was 
a debut that I think was back in 2018.
 

It was received well. The bonds are very 
compatible with green finance. We've been the  

issuer of them for I think it is already five 
years now. So it is an underlying green. And,  

of course, that will relate to the taxonomy 
of the green. Europe has one. Indonesia has  

just announced one. Last January, announced by the 
President, our first green taxonomy for Indonesia.  

And soon this will need to be international 
comparison. International compatibility.  

What does it mean? By the way, I find taxonomy 
and taxes are very amusing. I was probably gonna  

steal that storey to Indonesia. But yep, the 
next function of the government is to provide  

platform. For a country like Indonesia, 
it's very important to provide platform,  

not only for the public funds to become catalysts, 
but public funds that become catalysts and invite  

private participation. We are trying to establish 
what we call our country platform, the energy  

transition mechanism. We announced this with 
the Asian Development Bank back in Glasgow  

last November. It is going to be a platform 
that combines the carbon reduction facility  

and the renewable energy facility. Those two. 
It is very important not only talking about the  

green, despite the fact that we know that that 
is the objective. That is the goal. But also  

for a country like Indonesia where 70% of our 
electricity is coming from a coal power plant.  

It's very important to talk about the transition 
on how to go there. We cannot just say that the  

coal, you close and shut down. It has to be 
some transition. This is the platform that  

is needed for the transition of the energy. 
Including building the green. Thank you. 
 

Thank you very much. And since you brought 
the taxonomy up again, I'm going to just get  

our technical team to please unveil the results 
of the poll that we took to see how everybody  

responded to that. Can we get that up on the 
screen? So, 57% say it is somewhat likely that  

framework measures like the taxonomy will 
substantially increase the impact that sustainable  

investments will have on climate mitigation. And 
35% see it as very likely. So that's a very large  

majority that considers that this could be a good 
initiative. And with that, I'd like to go back, if  

I may, to Ms. Thomas and ask for your take on this 
and whether you think that we finally are moving  

toward more comperability and accountability 
when it comes to claims about ESG, green,  

sustainability, whatever label you put on 
it. Do you think we are starting to go in  

that direction that is so critical 
to win the trust of investors? 
 

Yes, I do. And your earlier points about 
green?washing I think are absolutely key. One  

of the key architects of the Paris Agreement wrote 
last month that green?washing is the new climate  

denial, but it's even more dangerous, in fact, and 
even more insidious that climate denial, because  

without appropriate accountability rules, it's 
harder to identify. And so these types of warnings  

really are eliciting the appropriate response from 
the regulators, the rules and standard assessors  

and the policymakers to accelerate the disclosures 
and the standards that we're gonna need so that  

there can be accountability and we can tackle 
the issue. Robust disclosure is our key weapon in  

battling the scourge of green?washing. So I think 
what we certainly welcome the announcement of the  

International Sustainability Standards that 
was made at Glasgow COP. The introduction of  

the SSDR regulations in Europe. The Climate 
Disclosure Proposal from the SDC last week.  

And the disclosures that are being introduced in 
the UK next month. These are all really important  

developments, but they're gonna take time 
before they're fully and robustly adopted. 
 

So I would say in the meantime, let us not use 
this green?washing accusation to stamp on the  

green shoots of progress. Investors who clearly 
themselves have to adhere to the highest standards  

of integrity, have an absolutely critical role 
to play in scrutinising and verifying claims  

made by business. And we need them to use their 
full agency as forceful stewards. Doing the due  

diligence on the transition pathways and plans of 
businesses. How much capital expenditure and R&D  

investments are aligned with the Net Zero target? 
Ensuring that that all acquisitions are aligned  

with a Net Zero target. And 
importantly, and this is  

where we also need some regulatory intervention, 
ensuring that disposals of high carbon assets  

aren't simply offloaded to private 
markets where there is less scrutiny,  

and so we need to make sure the companies 
disposing of those assets maintain oversight and  

responsibility for the transition or decommissions 
of those disposed assets. Because this discussion  

isn't solely about financial stability. It is also 
incredibly importantly about climate stability, as  

I think we've heard from the other contributors. 
Thank you very much. Let me ask Werner Hoyer,  

if I may. First of all, what are 
you seeing in terms of the impact  

of the sustainable taxonomy? I know it's early 
days, but are you getting the sense that it could  

show results and become a model beyond Europe 
or at least mobilise action beyond Europe?  

What would be needed to drive this transparency 
and accountability even one step further? 
 

Well, when I look at the polls you 
have just shown here on screen,  

I must say I was very positively surprised. I am 
not that optimistic. Because we have to be very,  

very vigilant. The temptations go with 
this instrument. So we have to be very,  

very clear. We have to arrive at the appropriate 
instruments not only when it comes to  

accountability and transparency and reporting 
rules and all this. That goes without saying.  

No, we must also say, look, a country like the 
Maldives, for instance, they have contributed  

to the climate problem which we are living under 
with 0%. But they are hit the most. So when we  

address the climate change action, then we must 
make sure that we bring the best technologies to  

them in order to cope with the problem. And this 
is what always brings me back to the idea to say,  

think development climate and innovation together. 
I take the big ?? very big example. That's Africa.  

Africa will need to multiply its electricity 
production within the next 50 to 20 years by  

a factor of 4. I have a couple of ideas which 
kind of energy technologies you might use to  

get this electricity produces. Are you 
going for go with our latest technologies?  

Some that are still in the institutes of our 
universities, and bring that technology there.  

I think we have the responsibility to do 
that. Otherwise, we all fail. As a European,  

I say we would be crazy not to do it because this 
someone of the areas where the European Unions are  

technologically leading. So let's take 
the opportunity. There is a responsibility  

and an opportunity at the same time. 
So all the transparency ingredients,  

like accountability, reporting, that goes without 
saying. That is a must but it's not enough. 
 

Let me ask you one other question 
because Mr. Sreekant mentioned  

the need to incentivize investment in green 
financial initiatives. What could that mean,  

for example, for the EIB? What could, what 
are possibilities for how to do that? 
 

Well, at the end of the day, EIB and 
other institutions like this are a bank.  

We lend money. Sometimes we horrify people by say 
weather lend you money but we want the money back.  

This has been totally a big surprise. Well, 
the trick is, of course, to combine the lending  

of an institution like EIB with the grants 
and the supports that Member States of the  

European Union or the Union itself or others 
can give. And this link makes the difference.  

With grants alone, we will never reach the 
objectives. With lending alone, obviously,  

neither. So we must combine grants and 
loans. And in particular when it comes to  

targeting technology. For targeting the latest 
technologies, developing latest technologies,  

we must say that this ?? for of the private 
sector investors at the beginning is too risky.  

This will not do the trick. The trick is to 
be done by bringing something into motion  

with the support of the Member States of the 
Union in our case and its institutions, the bank,  

but then make something ?? let something 
develop that then becomes profitable for the  

entrepreneurs who want to participate in it. 
But this is a perfect link of State activity,  

of lending, and of technological development 
with industry. We need all the three elements. 
 

Thank you very much. Mr. Sreekant, did you have 
a reaction to the audience poll that we just  

saw? And beyond that, I have another question 
for you as well. Perhaps that one first. 
 

No, that's a very logical thing. 
I think, in fact, 57% is less,  

more likely it's 92. That is the key to ensure 
there is no green?washing and there is similar  

valuation of the proposals across the investors. 
Mm?hmm. You gave us a perspective very much from  

your point of view as a major utility. India 
is a big, decentralised country. How could  

local funds and local investors be better tapped 
to match them? Werner Hoyer essentially was just  

talking about the need to match things when 
we're talking about financing. How could  

local bodies in your country better match up with 
capital to do things that are perhaps a little bit  

below the threshold of a big company like yours? 
See, the Indian financial market is one. Despite  

we have a Federal structure, but the market is 
one. There is a free flow of capital across the  

states. There is no barrier at all. They 
are all subject to the same regulation,  

same investors, and, therefore, the flow 
of capital, there is absolutely no issue.  

As far as the smaller issues are concerned, 
if they have to act ?? to have this market,  

the capital markets, then size is one constraint. 
The cost of tapping this market below a certain  

threshold becomes expensive. So that is 
one of the barriers. Otherwise, there is no  

difficulty for them to tap this market. 
Thank you very much. I'd like to also ask  

you to talk, all of you, a little bit 
about cooperation. And I will, again, go  

back to Minister Shauna to talk about how you are 
co?operating, both with neighbouring countries and  

organisations and beyond that with international 
institutions. I know that you are banking on  

renewable project developers from India, among 
other places, and maybe you can tell us a little  

bit about that. And also about what else you're 
doing to trigger foreign direct investment. 
 

We are a middle?income country. And like I said 
before, we announced to become a carbon?neutral  

country just in 2019. And since then, we've 
had continuous flow of support and interest  

from our development partners, bilaterally as 
well as with NDBs as well to enhance and develop  

our energy sector. And we've also received in both 
in grant form and in concessional loan as well to  

increase our capacity to invest renewable 
energy in the Maldives. I've heard some  

comments about ?? just now ?? about one 
of the challenges or one of the barriers  

is maybe the size of it. And that's actually one 
of the issues that we face in the Maldives. I'd  

like to also challenge that small is beautiful, as 
well. And use the Maldives as a testing ground to  

implement this and to take it to the next level. 
So one of our experiences is over the past years,  

we've had support from our develop partners 
to enhance our energy sector, to develop and  

make our country investment ready. And I think 
we have reached that stage at the moment. 
 

So we want to continue to work 
with our international partners  

to increase international cooperation, 
which is fundamental to the Maldives and to  

develop our country as a whole as well. So 
achieving the country targets in the energy sector  

calls for continual support from international 
agencies. And I'd like to also note that one  

of the things that we have in the Maldives is that 
we have the political will. We have the investment  

environment right now. And we just 
need a little bit of hand?holding  

to take us to the next level. We are a small 
country and the Maldives is so achievable  

to reach Net Zero by 2030. And for 
us to ?? as a whole, as a ?? as a  

world, we can't afford to not reach this. So we 
call upon all countries to work together, to reach  

these targets because 2030 is not so far away for 
us to keep global emissions below 1.5 is critical  

for our country's survival, for our country's 
development, and for our existence as well. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me ask with 
our unfortunately rather short amount  

of remaining time. I would like to go to 
Vice Minister Hirose and also Minister  

Nazara and ask you to talk about financing when it 
comes to adaptability and resilience. Perhaps that  

connexion I'll briefly mention the commitments 
to the Green Climate Fund, which, of course, were  

supposed to be reached by 2020 and were not. Now 
supposedly will be reached by 2023. As you know,  

we're talking about $100 billion, often viewed as 
far too little to address the problem. The UN?IPCC  

has said that adaptable is absolutely urgent and 
that we're far behind what's needed. So say a  

word to us, if you would Vice Minister Hirose, 
from your point of view about what the best  

solutions are for financing climate resilience. 
Yes, thank you very much. And, I mean,  

we are ?? Japan is committed to work with Asian 
countries for paving the road for decarbonisation,  

for climate neutrality. And we have a 
common goal. At the top of the mountain,  

but there could be different pathways towards, 
you know, getting to this goal. And Japan is  

working very closely with Asian countries to have 
a roadmap towards this goal. Give that, you know,  

in the Asian countries, we expect that, you 
know, the demand for electricity will increase  

by 2.5 times in the next 40 years, which is 
something that we definitely have to address. 
 

Now, at the same time, as I said, you 
know, different countries in Asia have  

different circumstances. And the circumstances 
or conditions of the Asian countries to introduce  

renewable energy is different from, 
for example, from other continents  

in terms of solar or wind power, you know, for 
example, in the wind power ?? I mean, you know,  

the oceans are not shallow. Or in terms of the 
flatland is mostly populated and so on. So there  

are many constraints. So in addition to that, 
as the Vice Minister from Indonesia mentioned,  

the Asian countries are still heavily 
dependent on coal. So we have to have a  

realistic transition from coal to other resources 
in order to match, you know, the demand to grow. 
 

So that is, you know, the kind of way of 
thinking for Japan. Has the initiative  

to assist Asian comes to come up with a roadmap 
and take into account the different circumstances  

of different countries. For example, it 
could be, for example, with Indonesia,  

it might be interested in a convergence of ammonia 
with coal or geothermal power. Or Thailand or  

Vietnam might be more interested in 
solar energy, and so on. We are going to  

take different circumstances into account in 
different countries. We are going to do that  

by providing financing up to $10 billion in the 
next ?? for specific projects. And also utilising  

the results of our R&D to do projects in Asia and 
doing capacity building. Human capital management.  

Using decarbonisation technologies. So that 
is, I ?? and I think it is very important with  

the Ukraine crisis, energy security is an issue 
right now. We have to have a real way forward.  

That keeping, you know, the very high goal of 
the decarbonisation, but having a realistic  

pathway towards that. I think that is 
the way of thinking Japan is on that. 
 

And in terms of the commitment, you know, I 
mean, Japan has committed in Glasgow by our  

Prime Minister to have an additional $10 billion 
for the next five years. In addition to the  

$60 billion, you know, that we have committed 
in the past. And that was highly appreciated,  

I think. And we hope, you know, that by that 
and together with the other developed countries,  

we can assist, you know, the developing 
countries for this transition. 
 

Thank you very much. Vice Minister Nazara, talk 
to us about the cooperation piece from your  

point of view, Indonesia's point of view. What 
kind of co?operative initiatives are especially  

important for your country? And then also for 
you, a question about adaptation and what you  

see as crucial to addressing the vast investments 
that also need to be made to make infrastructure  

and more resilient in the face of change. 
One of the roles that the government must really  

do is to compile the list of projects. At the 
end of the day, it's about the list of projects.  

Now, once the list of projects is there, it 
is very important to make sure that there is,  

as mentioned earlier, EIB will be going 
away from the coal?based or whatever that  

is ?? maybe fossil?based projects. So 
it's very important to have the list.  

Then the government must put together the 
platform. How the international money can come in.  

This is where the cooperation will be very useful. 
Right now, with the Asian Development Bank,  

we are putting together what I mentioned 
earlier, energy transition mechanism.  

Now, on projects, there are a lot of 
things on adaptation. Especially for  

countries like Indonesia because we are a very 
vast country. Local wisdom is very important.  

It's about the local infrastructure. It's about 
the local handling, traditional ways of handling  

the garbage, the solid waste, and so on. 
They are all maybe, like, small pieces,  

but they are all very important when you put them 
together in a country as big as Indonesia. Of  

course, at the end of the day, our biggest problem 
is the coal, the coal power plant. We have to  

think about the transition. Now, let me tell you, 
the last two years, we were ?? we are ?? we are  

all hit by the COVID. The demand of electricity 
going down. Yes, we are looking at the recovery  

in the very near future, but a lot of 
countries at this moment are starting with the  

surplus in electricity. It is something that is 
?? that is the real problem. Then it is mixed with  

the local business climate. It's mixed with the 
local contract. It's mixed with the ?? I believe  

that in Indonesia, this is something that we have 
to make sure that the logic of renewable and green  

continue to be there. Despite the fact that 
we are starting with a surplus in electricity.  

We should not stop the discussion. 
Nevertheless, it is very important that  

we continue to co?operate. The government 
innovation will continue with the  

SBG bonds. We continue with the green financing. 
And we would like to make sure that it continues.  

It's not going to stop. We are doing our best 
to make sure the fossil?based subsidy is going  

into decline. It's very ?? it's very hard 
at this time of the day, it's very hard.  

But I think five years, three to five years 
ahead of us, it should be back to the normal. 
 

Very briefly, Werner Hoyer, if I hear that, it 
strikes me, your announcement that you would get  

out of fossil fuel financing. Has that made 
an impact? And is there a way to work with  

borrowers to nudge them? Or would you 
say there is plenty of other financiers  

out there who are willing to keep financing 
fossil fuels, so not a lot of leverage? 
 

No, not at all. I mean, what I see is that the 
money is lies on the streets for clean energies  

and projects in that context. I remember at the 
Davos meeting when we were still able to travel  

to Davos in winter when I saw a representative 
of a very, very important Swiss bank and said,  

what are you doing here at the roundtable on clean 
energy? I said, well, this is what my investors  

expect from me. This is going to be the name 
of the game. So I think the financing of these  

big projects is possible. I, for 
instance, believe that we will not  

achieve our objectives without a hire reliance 
on hydrogen, but green hydrogen. In order to have  

hydrogen green, you need to have huge electrolysis 
capacities and we need to establish them without  

recourse to call again. So these are the 
big challenges, particularly in Africa and  

Latin America, in Asia, I'm not so familiar. 
It's probably not that different. We have  

the technology and the investors. If we 
have convincing projects, we can do it. 
 

That's the public capital side. Just one word, 
if you would. I mentioned the Green Climate Fund.  

Developing in emerging countries that the rich 
countries prefer to concentrate on mitigation and  

that when it comes to anteing up for adaptation, 
we're a lot slower to meet the challenge. 
 

I can only say that allegation 
is totally correct. 
 

Anybody want to challenge it? 
I think so as well. 
 

Yeah, hard work to be done 
at COP27, in other words. 
 

Absolutely. 
Thank you so much to  

all of you for being here with us for this 
panel. Also to our remote guests, thanks so  

much for joining us. We really appreciate your 
taking the time. Minister Shauna and Ms. Thomas.


