And welcome to the Europassal for this very 
special studio session. Here at my side  

is the managing partner of The Blue Minds 
Company, and as you may already know,  

a former chancellor of Austria. Hello and welcome.  

Thank you so much for being here today. 
Thanks for having me. 
 

I'll ask you to be sure to use your mic 
as you answer the following question.  

So now if we look at back of some of the sessions 
we had, we talk about peace and security.  

What can we do to make energy affordable 
for households and industry? 
 

I think we need to realize this is a really 
massive crisis. We're not at the end,  

we're just at the beginning. If 
we look at the energy markets,  

you have seen the prices are going up 6 times, 7 
times, which is true for gas, which is true for  

power. If you translate that to the gasoline 
prices at the pump, people will pay 12 Euros  

per litre. You can imagine what that means for the 
common household, inflation, rent, so on. You can  

imagine what this means for industry 
and employment. My biggest concern  

is that it will be devastating and that we are 
definitely not acting swift and quick enough. 
 

Now with The Blue Minds Company you've been 
investing in a German company considered the  

European market leader for solar glass. You've 
been doing it for around two years. An important  

concern of that was to systematically expand 
the presence in Europe. How key technologies  

can be brought back to Europe is more topical 
than ever. Is Europe on the right track here? 
 

No, it isn't. There is a lot of work to do. 
So what we need to face and that's perhaps  

one of the biggest challenges is it doesn't make 
sense to trade one dependence from an autocratic  

government with dependencies with other 
autocratic governments. It's the reason I  

don't like so much the idea of betting on L & G. 
The energy transition will be lead by renewable  

powers. First and foremost solar because it's the 
easiest to deploy. You can put it on the rooftop,  

you can have utility at scale. We are one of the 
providers of the supply chain. If you look here  

today, this means we can easily recognise 
that we are completely dependent on Asian  

supplies. It means that there is no cell producer, 
which is the heart, remaining in Europe. So it  

doesn't make sense. We have to change that. We 
have to invest in innovation, and we have to  

change the supply chain. Americans are ahead 
of us. They have producers like First Solar,  

but Mr. Biden has set up a very ambitious plan. 
They have interesting tax incentives, tax reliefs,  

and they have reasonable tariffs to 
avoid dumping from Asian producers. 
 

And this is definitely a role model, 
we can learn a lot. But this, again,  

needs to stop talking around, 
but to taking real action. 
 

Taking real action is the theme of the 
day. In fact, it is the theme of the  

whole conference, from ambition to action. 
My heartfelt thanks to my guest Christian  

Kern. 


