Hello, everyone. Thank you for the introduction. 
My name is Helena Gualinga. I'm speaking to  

you right now from my home, my home community, 
Sarayaku, in the middle of the Ecuadorian Amazon.  

My community is a people that has been 
struggling against the oil companies for  

before I was even born. It is a 
fight that my generation and my  

peers have decided to follow, and 
to follow, in my elders' footsteps.  

For me, this against the industries 
that have come to our communities  

is not something that is only my fight - it is 
something that has been done for generations  

and generations. And, in fact, my community took 
the Ecuadorian state to an international court  

for violating our human rights when they tried to 
enter our community violently. And, by doing so,  

set a legal precedent, not only in Ecuador, 
but many our countries in South America,  

which has led to many victories 
for the Amazon in recent years.  

I come from a place where we have beautiful 
waterfalls, clean rivers, we live off the  

land. But this unfortunately is not the reality 
for all, the entire Amazon. There is a lot of  

oil and mining and logging companies trying to 
come in to our territories, and take away all  

the beauty that we have, and the harmonious life 
that we lead in the Amazon. One of these threats  

is also the building of roads - roads coming 
into our territories, to build oil stations,  

and this brings the other industries, the logging 
industry, with them as well. This has led to  

extreme pollution in our territories. In the last 
two years, we've seen two of the most devastating  

oil spills in the Ecuadorian Amazon. The worst 
one is after the Chevron case 20 years ago.  

All of this has been made and done to us in the 
name of development. So, I often ask myself: what  

does the word "development" actually mean? And 
who is this development for? This is because it  

definitely has not been for indigenous communities 
in the Amazon, and front line defenders.  

On top of all of this, we 
have climate change coming  

in to our territories in the forms of 
drought, and in forms of huge, huge floods. So  

my community has been through one of the worst 
floods in our history in the last two years also,  

leaving my community completely without crops 
and half of my community losing our homes.  

So, yes, why do we just not transition to 
renewable energy? Because that would be so  

much better for the environment, and 
for indigenous communities. So let me  

tell you about a case with one of my dear, dear 
friends, that they're going through right now.  

My friend lives in a beautiful place in Piatua, 
it is a biodiversity hot spot, they call it,  

right Andes meet the Amazon, and they're trying 
to build a hydroelectric power station there.  

And the indigenous people in this it area are 
completely against it, and have been saying so  

for years and years. Every time no-one has really 
listened to them. There has been no consent from  

the communities for this company to enter, or for 
the government even to give out the concession.  

It is the right for this company to be there, the 
consent from the indigenous people from there was  

actually not existent. And why is 
this relevant? Because even though  

there has been an increase in the environmental 
responsibility when it comes to energy companies,  

there is still a lack of social accountability 
and human rights. There are many studies  

that actually say that free prior and 
informed consent - which means indigenous  

people have the right to decide over our 
own territories and actually be consulted  

and informed of what is going to happen on our 
territories, and that we actually have a say  

in what will happen - does not exist when it 
comes to energy companies. Also, in companies  

that are sustainable and they're green companies 
- and to me, this is a clear example of what  

"energy greenwashing" looks like. That means 
that you take environmental responsibility  

but you do not take into account the human rights 
violations that may occur in these projects,  

in these processes. But that doesn't mean 
that renewable energy is not good, but it  

does mean that there is a lack of responsibility 
by this industry when it comes to human rights.  

South America is one of the most dangerous 
places for indigenous people for land offenders  

and environmental activists - land defenders 
and environmental activists. We can see that day  

by day of our peers being threatened, murdered, 
disappeared, et cetera. And there are definitely  

people in governments, companies, people with 
means behind this. If there is going to be  

a project that is going through, it needs to 
make sure that human rights are respected,  

that that is a priority. So that is why I'm 
directing myself to you, because you have the  

power to change this. You have the power to change 
all of the things that go on here in the Amazon  

in South America, where, unfortunately, 
my people, my family, my friends, are  

being persecuted and silenced because of our work 
against these industries. We need to make sure  

that human rights are a priority always, 
that their policies are implemented, both  

in the work that you're doing, when it comes to 
indigenous people, and this is something that,  

you know, this is something that should worry 
all of us, because these are people's lives, and  

people that live by these lands, and only want 
our future to be secure and to be protected.  

So I'm really happy to be here, 
and I thank you for this space.


