Ladies and gentlemen, when we talk today 
about the energies of the future, then,  

of course, this debate today also is 
against the backdrop of the cruel war,  

the cruel aggression Russia ?? of Russia 
against Ukraine. And it is our top?most  

priority as the Federal Government to help the 
people in Ukraine and to also make a contribution  

by sanctions, by diplomatic efforts to 
make this war end as soon as possible. 
 

This war, once more, at the same time, also shows 
us one thing. That is how vulnerable we are and  

how dependent we are as a society, as an economy 
on fossil imports. This becomes particularly  

clear when it comes to energy supplies. And, of 
course, the existential question of war and peace  

is these days predominant in political debates 
and policymaking. However, this doesn't mean that  

we should forget or loss track of other 
crises because they are no less urgent. 
 

The climate crisis and the large?scale extinction 
of species jeopardize the very foundation of our  

lives, our natural foundation. Our supply. Our 
economy. And the foundation of our society. Of  

our cohesion. Both of these crises continue to 
be exacerbated with every day that we hesitate or  

fail to take action. And that is why it would 
be most counterproductive, it would be wrong to  

consider tackling them now as seemingly secondary 
issues. This war is challenging many things that  

we took for granted, and it raises old questions 
we must now address with new urgency and with a  

new dimension. What does this also mean? Many 
of the responses we had continue to be sound.  

Germany's decision to become 
climate neutral by 2045  

is therefore still sound. The Federal 
Government took office with the  

pledge to replace fossil fuels in order to 
counter the climate crisis on the one hand  

and the global scarcity of raw materials, 
the raw material crisis on the other hand. 
 

It continues to be true that tackling the 
biodiversity loss is linked to the climate  

crisis. It is just as existential. Although 
in political debates, it is only addressed  

afterwards. Regarding the shift of our country 
towards a climate neutral and sustainable  

economy and society, our only response can be 
that we double down on the social ecological  

transformation more resolutely, and we must not 
solidify status quo that has long been outdated.  

Exiting nuclear and coal and also in the 
medium term, oil and gas. Continues to be  

the right thing to do. This government 
took office with a coalition agreement.  

The pledge to make our country fit for 
the future. The future of our children  

and grandchildren. We have now set the course. 
It is now time to act and not to hesitate. 
 

And with all the urgency, we must also ensure 
that we prevent social upheavals in this process.  

There can be no simple one?dimensional solutions 
to these complex challenges, of course, and they  

are also not worth striving for because the best 
measures are those that address several crises  

at once. Energy supplies, climate stewardship, 
the sparing use of resources, and biodiversity  

conservation, all of these are intrinsically 
linked and must therefore be considered as  

one. We must tackle these crises together. All of 
these complex issues are linked to our security.  

The security of our economy, our 
society, of securing our prosperity,  

and securing the basis of our livelihoods. And 
that is why I as the Federal Minister for the  

Environment will be committed to tackling these 
environmental crises even more decisively. 
 

I want to mention four example of what the Federal 
Ministry For the Environment is doing to this end.  

First of all, renewables represent a solution, and 
it is a solution that allows for a quick switch  

and faze out of fossil fuels. As opposed to other 
solutions. This is affordable and sustainable,  

and that is why a sharply accelerated expansion 
of renewables is key for the Federal Government  

in order to deal with the current crisis and also 
for the ecological transformation as a whole. 
 

This requires efficient and streamlined 
planning and approval procedures.  

I attach great importance to the fact that despite 
all the acceleration, we must not forget nature  

and biodiversity conservation. I mentioned 
the crisis of biodiversity loss. It is just as  

existential as the climate crisis, and that is why 
we cannot pit these two crises against each other.  

In fact, we must tackle them together. 
That we balance interests.  

We want to give a legally secure 
and rapid approval procedure,  

and we must reconcile these two aspects with one 
another. Shortly, I will join Federal Minister  

Robert Habeck in tabling joint proposals, a new 
biodiversity programme will be part of these  

proposals. It will help us protect species 
and nature that is particularly affected  

by the expansion of renewable energies. 
A second aspect I would like to mention.  

Dependencies do not only exist 
with a view to energy supplies,  

but also regarding many raw materials and within 
supply chains. This reliability and stability and  

the stronger interdependence also imply 
resource efficiency and a circular economy.  

We must be able to extract resources in the most 
sustainable way possible using them sparingly  

and efficiently and keep them within the 
cycle for as long as possible. In nature,  

there is no waste. We should follow this example 
by designing projects from the start in such a way  

that they don't become waste the next day. 
 

To do that, these products must be long?lived. 
They should be reusable and repairable.  

And therefore, also make a contribution to 
climate change mitigation. The concept of  

waste is not something we should use in the way 
we think and act. Whatever cannot be used to its  

original purpose can be used as a secondary raw 
material for another purpose and it can be used in  

another product. This is good for the environment 
and it is also a contribution to a resilient and  

crisis?resistant economy. The Federal 
Government will table a strategy for the  

circular economy to this end. We want to take 
key steps away from the throw?away society. 
 

For example, through the right to have a product 
repaired. We want to underpin this, for example,  

with a new support programme, repairing instead of 
discarding. All of these things will have ?? will  

be in line with the European Directive to this 
end. This example also shows that it is worth  

addressing crises wholistically. Studies by 
the International Resource Panel have shown  

that roughly half of all global greenhouse gas 
emissions, as well as 90% of biodiversity loss,  

and water scarcity are due to raw materials and 
extraction and processing in one way or another.  

A smart and sparing use of raw materials with 
everything that we are using within our economy,  

that is good for our security and 
also good for our biodiversity. 
 

In addition, it is good for our water resources. 
It makes our economies more resilient to crises.  

And thirdly, the transformation of our economy 
and society also includes working with nature,  

not against it. And that is why I want to focus 
a lot more strongly on nature?based solutions.  

Aside from renewable energy sources, bogs, soils, 
meadows, and forests, are important components  

to mitigate climate change. They are 
capable of binding atmospheric carbon  

and then storing it in the long run. 
And they can do that more efficiently  

the better their condition is. And they can 
fulfil their climate change mitigation function.  

At the same time, in?tact ecosystems are also more 
resilient towards the impact of the climate crisis  

we can already feel in Germany or in Central 
Europe. Just like elsewhere in the world. 
 

They are more resilient against these negative 
impacts such as droughts and heavy rainfall.  

And, of course, I have to say that as the Minister 
in charge of nature conservation, they are  

also beneficial for nature. For biodiversity. 
Yesterday, I presented the core aspects of an  

action programme for national climate change 
mitigation, which will be a key pillar of my  

work. We will make 4 billion Euros available over 
the next four years, which is a paradigm shift  

in our work with natural climate change mitigation 
and nature?based solutions. It is a quantum leap  

for building up, preserving, and 
protecting carbon sinks in Germany. 
 

A fourth aspect I want to mention. Policies 
for the future also include preparing for the  

impacts of the climate crisis that we cannot 
prevent. I said it before, global warming  

has also reached Germany and Central Europe. Of 
course other parts of the world also are severely  

affected, even more strongly affected than 
we are. The most recent report by the IPCC  

gives a very merciless account of the 
status quo. We have to admit that Germany  

has not been well?prepared enough for this. 
I want to change that. The Federal Government  

wants to change that. We want to have a 
sound basis for adaptation and precaution.  

Our ministry is supporting an immediate 
action programme and we are supporting  

the Federal states and the municipalities 
in Germany to develop tailored adaptation  

measures. This needs to be different in each 
municipality, and we need to adapt it to the local  

framework and conditions. Parallelly, my ministry 
is working on a climate change adaptation law.  

And the climate change adaptation strategy. 
We will also ensure a permanent funding scheme  

with clear rules for responsibilities in terms 
of funding between the Federal?States and the  

Federal Government so that we can have a 
systematic and blanket adaptation plan. 
 

Ladies and gentlemen, the solutions that we 
pursue in environment and climate protection  

help us to fight the climate crisis and also the 
loss of biodiversity. But they are also helping to  

reduce dependencies on certain resources and 
raw materials, and they protect our natural  

livelihoods. And in that sense, nature 
conservation and environmental protection  

are good for preventing crises and are parts 
of our security policy. There has been a long  

tradition in environmental policy of thinking in 
interrelations. Starting maybe with the report  

on the limits to growth, the discussion on the 
term of sustainability, and the 2030 agenda. 
 

I want to continue this tradition by advancing the 
socio?ecological transformation of our country,  

and I am delighted about everyone who wants to 
support me in this endeavour. I am very confident  

that we will be able to pursue this process if 
we do it resolutely enough. Thank you very much.


