Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.

Good morning, dear colleagues.

It is nice that we are now having an event
again.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, droughts
can be devastation, forest fires in South

America, rising sea levels in South Asia,
and flood disasters in Germany - this is what

characterised last year, and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who will give his speech

in a few minutes, said "our planet is broken".

This is how he described the climate crisis.

This is the biggest challenge of the 21st
Century for all of us.

Climate change mitigation and the energy transition
are about the future of our planet, our families,

and our children.

But it is even more than that, and we are
seeing this now.

It is also about very specific security interests,
and geopolitical security in the 21st Century.

The brutal war on Ukraine started by President
Putin has brought this home to us, and in

all its severity.

He - this brings a lot of suffering to the
people, and it shows us that we have to become

fully independent from Russian fossil fuel
imports.

We always knew this as Europeans, at the latest
since 2014, and a strategy was launched to

diversify our energy imports, but we didn't
really take action then, and now we see the

consequences of this in a very tragic way.

But it is spilt milk, so this is why it is
even more important that we now become fully

independent from fossil fuel imports from
Russia.

Let me stress this once more: there has been
a big discussion for many people, also within

the European Union, about the fossil fuel
embargo.

Many people call it this ... well, we have
some issues with this term, because, when

we talk about an embargo, then we expect,
like with other sanctions, that all countries

join this action, but here, among you, there
are many countries which are also dependent

on fossil fuel imports, so, when we in Germany
and in Europe, seek to become independent

from fossil fuels, then we cannot import our
energy crisis to other countries, and this

is also our global responsibility in this
very difficult time.

Nonetheless, let me be clear: Germany wants
to fully become independent from Russian fossil

fuels.

Other people call it "embargo", you can also
call it a national gradual oil embargo, as

the minister of the economy is currently preparing,
and it was made very clear that Germany in

the last weeks, Emily with regard to coal,
we have already halved our imports, and we

do this in other areas as well, not only in
half our imports, but fully get independent

from Russian fossil fuel imports.

But we also have to be honest here, and this
is the major challenge here at an event like

this when we talk about the energy transition.

For the transitional period, since we have
to do everything at the same time now, we

have to work on the energy transition, we
have to now get rid of fossil fuel imports,

now we need other fossil fuel imports, so
in the short term, we will need gas and oil

from other countries.

This is also true, but, in parallel, we will,
like all other countries, in the medium and

in the long term, prepare to make the transition
to renewables, and to boost energy efficiency.

For 15 years, we've been talking about it,
and now we want really to implement this.

As the Federal Republic of Germany, as the
new Federal Government, prior to this terrible

war, we put this down in our coalition agreement.

Even though it is technical, I can only recommend
the following.

Let's look at this together once more because
we made it very clear in the agreement that

gas, no matter where it comes from, can only
be a bridge, and every bridge has an end to

it, and this is why we have to formulate this
end and also put it down and enshrine it in

law.

We did this as the international community
with the climate agreement from Paris from

2015, and we agreed on the 1.5-degree goal,
and, with commitments from the industrial

countries to phase out fossil fuels by the
middle of the century.

In our coalition agreement, we made it very
clear that we, the Germans, and, as Europeans,

we consider this our responsibility to also
reach this goal by the middle of the 2040s.

Why we put this down in our coalition agreement
prior to the war this requires not only incentives,

but we need regulations for this to boost
the expansion of renewables, and solar, and

wind, and so on, because it's not only a climate
policy issue, but it is also THE economic

and industrial policy issue of our time.

Investments in renewables are investments
in security, and our freedom.

It is very clear, we can only do this when
we work together.

Going it alone nationally will not work, and
this is why our energy transition is also

included in the European Green Deal.

We wanted only clean energies in Europe, but
we want to strengthen the strategic sovereignty

of the European Union.

Our goal was, and continues to be, the first
continent in the world to become climate-neutral.

With this, we want to have an energy sovereignty
for the European Union, and to ensure this

together.

We can only achieve this if all 27 member
states of the European Union work together,

and also if you bring all the other European
neighbouring countries on board, and this

is why, a few days ago, I was in Kosovo - and
together with the Kosovan Minister of Energy,

who I would like to welcome here today, we
were on a big mountain - it was really cold,

there was snow, and?

In the middle of that, we inaugurated the
country's largest windfarm.

I'm so happy that you are here today, because
this investment is the largest foreign investment

in the history of your country.

And this is for an investment brings better
air, reliable electricity, more security to

your people.

Many, many homes are supplied with this, and
it covers 10% of the Kosovo electricity demands.

At the same time, in the situation, now that
we have the Russian war of aggression, it

helps Kosovo to become independent from fossil
fuel imports.

And now, if we look at all the windfarms - and
it is not always easy in Germany.

I was very concerned and asked how long was
the planning period, and I was relieved when

I heard it was only seven years, and that
is pretty much the time that we need in Germany,

because the thought that Kosovo will also
be better in that field better than us, but

it is not good news for the planning period,
but it makes our common challenge clear to

us.

We not only have to install more windfarms,
but we have to become faster as regards planning

law, as regards the construction on site,
and also when it comes to the interplay between

all stakeholders and those who have created
ideas and those who have to implement and

can implement those ideas.

This is why I would like to encourage all
of you, especially with regard to be planning,

to become faster, and also with regard to
co-operation: what is this all about?

Well, Moldova shows us, the new president,
who recently only took office, said it very

clearly: we have to invest in energy efficiency,
in renewables.

We cannot completely be dependent on Russian
imports, so we want to get connected to the

European electricity network, and it is not
two years.

We don't have two years.

It has to be done now.

This is why, on the 5th April, we will have
a support conference from Moldova with regard

to refugees, but also with regard to the energy
supply, and I know that many energy experts

are here who install solar and wind power,
and I would like to encourage all of you to

join us, and to look at how we can help Kosovo,
not only with regard to its energy supply,

but also with you to this very critical situation,
and with regard to its security.

Because this war makes in a very dramatic,
in a clear and dramatic way that energy and

security are closely intertwined.

Climate policy is the most important geopolitical
task of our time.

The rise of renewables is not only a reality
today and a necessity, it is also - and this

is something that I, as the Foreign Minister,
what is very important to me, it is the expansion

of renewable energy will accelerate and shift
the international balance of power.

And this is why I would like to address three
points that are important to me: firstly,

the importance of technology.

Secondly, the risk of new dependencies, and
now the positive news at the end, the opportunities

for new co-operation.

On my first point, let me say, if you want
energy security, you need the best technology.

I think we can be very honest here also, in
economic policy terms: we are dealing with

the technology race of the 21st Century about
green hydrogen, the best transport system,

and the storage of electricity, and it is
also about clean cars.

We have great potential from Norway to the
United Arab Emirates, United Arab Emirates,

but we don't have to fight each other in this
race but work together with researchers, we

need ambitious research and international
partnerships, and a strong foreign policy,

and a strong industrial trade policy, and
this is what we would do in the future.

So, not only with regard to our national interests,
also, we would consider this as our joint

international task.

Now, what has already been done, but can only
be a beginning, is the following example:

Siemens has installed four gigawatts of wind
energy on the African continent.

This is equivalent to about 60% of total wind
energy in Africa, so, on the one hand, we

can be proud of this; on the other hand, it
only shows what we still need to do, because

2015, the international community, the industrial
countries, not only pledged that they would

achieve the 1.5 degree goal, but they also
promised to help Africa in electrifying its

country, and now here we have to become better.

What is also clear is that we have that countries
will be strengthened, where we will expand

renewables, but we have to make sure that
our energy supply is clean, but that, at the

same time, we help millions of people worldwide
and to lift them out of energy poverty.

This brings me to my second point: the dependencies.

Now, when we think about windfarms, electricity
lines, we not only need minerals, we also

need co-operation with countries which are
not flawless democracies, and which have authoritarian

tendencies, and this is why it is important
that also, as with oil and gas, and green

hydrogen, and renewables, we renewables, it
is all intertwined and interconnected.

We are a country where the energy transition
was born.

Many years ago, and many people are here in
this hall who invented the Renewables Act,

but, at the beginning, we didn't look closely
enough.

We said let's invest in renewable energy,
and let's look at social issues and aspects

later.

But one thing is clear: renewables and social
justice can only go hand in hand.

If we install renewable energy of plants,
then we also need not only labour law but

also strong unions, and this is our credo
that we have at the international climate

conferences, I'm happy to see many young representatives,
the slogan, the headline, from the European

foreign policy.

Clean energies cannot be achieved by dirty
deals, so in spite of all dilemmas and problems,

we always have to make sure that one thing
belongs to another and we cannot offset one

with another, we need a values-led policy
and foreign policy.

This brings me to my third point: there is
no end to energy policy in history.

The energy transition opens up new opportunities
for international co-operation if we do things

right, so we can overcome old contradictions
between energy and in future clean energy,

and economic interests between climate protection
and more prosperity.

At this moment, we are living at a time where
we can only master this challenge together,

and now, in the times of the pandemic, and
also the pandemic and energy issues don't

stop at national borders, and, as the Secretary-General
said, if our plan set broken, then we have

to use all tools available to us together
in order to heal the damage done as best as

possible, and also, together, we have to build
national and international prosperity.

For this reason, we have the Berlin Energy
Transition Dialogue and the new climate energy

and foreign policy of the Federal Government.

We have to use our tools for more climate
change mitigation and sustainable development

for all countries over the world.

This is what we want to do for the next energy
conference, at the end of the year in Egypt,

and at the Federal Foreign Offers, as we've
worked together with the ministry for economic

affairs and climate action, and now we have
a new state secretary and special enjoy for

international climate policy, so we appointed
new state secretary, Jennifer Morgan, I'm

very happy about this, and she will help us
make these 226 embassies, make them climate

embassies.

It is important that this energy independence
that we are working for - it is important

that we don't do this fighting or against
other countries, but together with other countries.

We have many projects in Africa in the field
of renewables, but we want to use hydrogen.

This is why we are working on, and Minister
Habeck will talk more about this, we have

offices in Algeria and Angola, and more will
follow in the years.

Because one thing is important to us: we want
to work together, and we consider energy transition

as a security policy and an approach to sustainable
development, and we want to work on this together.

This also means to invest money.

Fast energy transition will come at a price,
and this is why the industrial countries have

to live up to their promises which they made
in 2015, to spend $100 billion dollars, for

poor countries, and this applies at a mitigation
loss and damage.

We can decide now what we do.

We will not make the climate crisis undone,
but we can do everything we can to repair

and to limit the damage that has been done,
and that we can start the sustainable development

not only for a clean environment but also
for the prosperity of our people, and together

we can help our regions and people in the
world to become less dependent and thus be

more secure.

This is what the German climate foreign policy
stands for, and this conference.

We would like to extend a warm welcome to
all of you.

Thank you.


