There is a huge unleveraged potential for 
more equitable participation in renewable  

energy policy making and implementation. 
Gender equality is a prerequisite and  

key driver for the achievement of 
the sustainable development goals,  

sdgs, closing the gender gap in the energy sector 
is essential for a successful energy transition.
 

Welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. Welcome, 
dear panel. If you are a regular visitor to  

conference s like this one, or if you were work 
in the energy sector, then I think it will come  

as no surprise to you that energy remains one 
of the most diverse sector there is. ... women  

nonetheless remain under represented with 32% of 
the jobs in green energy. Given that diversity has  

proven to be a key driver of innovation closing 
the gender gap is crucial to the future vitality  

of the firms and the organisations working 
in this space, and therefore to the success  

of of the energy transition as a whole, and it 
is crucial for another reason as well, and that  

is one that was just mentioned by our social 
media moderator, in parts of the Global South,  

it is women who bear the main burden when clean 
energy is scarce, which is why gender equality  

is so close ly linked to the achievement of 
the sustainable development goals in general  

and SDG7 in particular which was the subject of 
a separate panel earlier this morning. We want  

to ask how we can bring down the barriers. 
What kind of structural obstacles do women  

encounter? How many more girls and women can be 
attracted to renewable energy professions? What  

are the roles of the state and private sector in 
fostering gender mainstreaming? Those are some of  

the issues we're going to address with a fantastic 
panel. ... great to have you joining our panel.  

Sheila Oparaocha is the Executive Director on 
Gender and Sustainable Energy, co-chair of the UN  

DESA's technical advisory group for SD G7, a real 
honour to have you with us. Dan Dorner is ... he  

is also former head of International Energy for 
the UK government. It's great to see you again,  

Dan. And it is a pleasure to Thomas Fohgrub, head 
of the co-ordination unit for the UN Institute  

for Training and reference global platform for 
action on sustainable energy in displacement  

settings. And I would like to begin if I may 
with really quick audience poll, and again,  

dear audience members, you can do this live, if 
you're in the room by using our digital tool,  

and, if you're with us online, then you 
can either use our hashtag, #betd22,  

or use the digital tool to answer the following 
question: what are the main barriers to gender  

equality in the energy sector? And this is 
a word cloud so type in any words or words  

that you would like. We will come back and take 
a look at our cloud a little bit later on. So  

generally, I start panels with a look at 
challenges. But I decided to turn things  

around this time, and I would like to do a quick 
introductory look at solutions. Because all of you  

have ample experience in this area of trying to 
find good ways to address the challenge of gender  

equality in energy and especially in clean energy, 
and I'm going to ask that you keep your answers  

to 90 second or under - I know that's a big ask 
- but that gives us more time later on. What in  

your view is the key, the three key measures 
that could really begin to make a difference  

in dealing with this challenge, and I will 
start if I may with you, Minister Rizvanolli.
 

Thank you very much. It is a great pleasure to 
be here today and discuss this important issue.  

Three key measures we can take each one of 
us in our countries is improving the share  

of women in STEM education and particularly 
in energy, promoting role models, affirmative  

measures to ensure that women are included in 
the energy sector, but also the last one but,  

not necessarily the least important one, in 
fact, maybe THE most important one is that  

each one of us becomes aware of the unconscious 
biases that we have about gender and energy,  

the stereotypes we link with certain occupations, 
particularly in energy, and that is the first  

step in order for us to be able to challenge 
those in our everyday lives, each one of us in  

our capacities, professional and personal. 
Let me go over to Cabinet Secretary Juma.
 

Thank you very much. Happy to be on this panel. I 
think three first of all is the cultural, dealing  

with cultures and the perspectives of women 
as consumers rather than producers of energy.  

For a long time, energy has been defined 
as a technical engineering subject and  

therefore not for women. So I think these 
perspectives are critical. Secondly,  

building the competencies of women to engage 
with the energy sector, which is technical,  

which is structural, you know, and 
so forth. Thirdly, providing access,  

particularly to facilitate the effective 
participation, and in this case,  

financing - financing that is affordable, 
that is flexible, that is relevant, you know,  

and that is directed to the right projects. 
Thank you very much. Of course everybody's  

going to get an opportunity to expand on the 
points that you're raising because all of them  

are so important. Let me go to Sheila Oparaocha.
Allow me to make it four rather than three but it  

aligns with what has been said. In energy, we see 
four traditional patches we need to accelerate.  

The first is ending energy poverty for women 
by providing afford able and aspired-for  

services and making these services a means to 
reduce women's drudgery and improve their welfare.  

The second is ensuring women's equal participation 
in the energy sector by what has already been  

said, being part of decision-making, but 
also within leadership at all levels.  

This also implies that women need to own 
wealth, creating businesses and enterprises,  

and I move from subsistence to wealth-creating. 
This means like you had said earlier on,  

that they need to have jobs, both in the 
renewable energy sector it is doing better,  

but also very much in the convention al 
sector across all technologies and levels.  

The third is about energy services to support 
social services. Such as for schools and health  

centres. We're going to hear from Thomas in 
humanitarian settings, but also for pumping and  

distributing domestic water. Certainly energy 
for social services has become more critical  

with regards to when we think about the COVID-19 
context, where care burden is disproportionately  

impacting women. Fourth, certainly not last, is 
putting the legal and policy frameworks in place  

that allow for the first three traditional 
pathways that we spoke of to take place. 
 

Thank you very much thank you. Dan?
Let me just agree with everything that  

has where been said. Already great points. Three 
quick points from me. I would say acknowledgement,  

action, and accountability. So, acknowledgement, 
firstly, acknowledge in two specific ways,  

so firstly acknowledge the problem. I think it 
sounds quite obvious in a room like this, but  

still so overlooked in many workplaces around 
the world. A lot of progress has been made,  

but as you've already said, still one 
of the least gender-balanced sectors.  

And acknowledge the opportunity. The energy sector 
is undergoing huge change to meet our clean energy  

and climate goals. This is an opportunity to 
also create a more diverse and balanced workforce  

at the same time. And frankly, when you're frying 
to overcome a threat to all of humanity in the  

form of climate change, you don't leave half of 
humanity on the sidelines. I mean, that's just  

absolutely crazy. I think we all know that. 
A clean energy future needs to harness the  

talent of everyone regardless of gender. On 
action, I mean, this whole conference is about  

ambition to action, with , and that is exactly 
what we need. The words of today need to transform  

into real change both today and tomorrow, and 
every day thereafter. And we need to do it at  

very many levels - personal and professional 
levels, reflecting on our own contributions,  

organisational level, and at the government 
level in terms of national policy and regulation.  

It has to be systemic, multifaceted, and ongoing. 
And thirdly, just quickly that key point about  

accountability: we need to reflect on whether 
the actions we are taking are the right ones,  

they're making a difference, and we course-correct 
along the way. That is something the clean energy  

ministerial tries to do in terms of shining 
a light on the issue, bringing the data,  

and tracking the progress, both at the ministerial 
meeting and throughout the year. Thanks. 
 

May I ask for quiet in the back of the room. 
There is a lot of echo here in the front.  

Gentlemen? Could I ask for quiet, please, in the 
back of the room? Thank you. Please, Thomas.
 

Thanks, Melinda. Thanks to the organisers for 
taking this topic on sort of the next level,  

to organise a dedicated session to this. And 
I only have one, in comparison to Sheila,  

one practical piece of advice. 
Do it. Hire them! I was able to  

give the opportunity to seven trainees in the 
last five years, and all of them were women.  

And only half of them, three of them, had 
an engineering background. They all came  

from different background, social sciences, 
and all of this, and that is the beauty of  

the energy topic as well, it is not only 
a technical problem. We are talking about  

the right business cases, we're talking about 
inclusion of the communities, and all of this,  

and here we don't need technicians. We need people 
with different skills sets, and that is where  

I think we will talk about the 
STEM topic later on, and all this,  

go broader, and we have so many decision-makers 
here in the room who are constant ly  

programmes where you can hire new people and 
recruitment processes. If you're in doubt, go for  

the woman. And that is the same with many people 
in the audience, and online. So, just hire them. 
 

Can I ask you, you gave me one reason, give 
a chance to talk about displacement settings  

and their effect. We are seeing major 
displacement in the war on Ukraine, I  

was wondering whether displacement settings offer 
opportunities as well as challenges for women?
 

Generally more challenges than 
opportunities, to be honest.  

If we we're looking at the energy situation 
in displacement settings, for those not  

familiar with this term, it means refugees, 
people on the move, displaced people, and  

we see two large components here. One is the 
cooking topic, and one is the more broader  

electrification and decarbonisation of 
diesel-powered infrastructure in this space.  

Obviously, when I think we all are aware of 
the cooking topic, it was already mentioned,  

but actually my first experience, and my first  

lightbulb moment was when I went to 
the first refugee camp in Tanzania,  

and I went to the health post, to the big 
hospital, and obviously the hospital in  

a refugee camp is not comparable 
to a hospital in Europe, obviously,  

but there was this very proud doctor who happened 
to study in Germany, so he was pleased to see me,  

and we talked in German. He showed me his 
electrical appliances, and we were there for  

the energy topic, he showed me the steriliser, 
and he showed me the statistics on the wall  

on the operations and turned out that 85% of 
the big operations are C-sections. So they're  

conducted on women and often girls and 
so whether there is enough electricity  

to sterilise the equipment, to have 
light at the night to deliver the babies,  

will determine the life or death of mainly 
women and girls. It is the cooking topic is very  

important. They spent hours on collecting firewood 
and all of this, but as Sheila already mentioned,  

the health topic is equally important. 
Thank you very much. Interesting. Let us  

take a quick look at our results. It's been 
shifting around but it pretty stable now.  

I'm hoping we can get it up on our big screen 
so everybody can see it. Yes. There we go. So,  

at the very centre is "social norms" which can 
encompass unconscious bias, which is mentioned  

separately here, but, again, those kinds of 
barriers that all of you challenged and that  

was mentioned when he said just do it, get beyond 
those norms. That's at the centre. Then a lot of  

over lap with some of the things that you've said. 
Somewhere here I saw skills and qualifications.  

That's right. That's down in the lower half. 
Lack of mentoring, options ... lack of standing.  

Traditional mindset is part of the skills and 
norms. The data currently available is also  

here. That is an interesting one. I see a couple 
of nodding, so maybe you can talk a little bit  

about that? And then reconciliation of 
equality and equity. Very interesting.  

Equal access to energy mentioned. Patriarchal 
behaviour of colleagues, very much part of social  

norms and patterns, and complexity of the centre. 
Who would like to speak to any of those points?  

They're studying the graph. Dan?
 

Actually, I just pick up on up on the data point 
because that is one that is dear to our heart  

in terms of the clean energy, and empowerment 
initiative, bringing it to the surface, measure  

it, make it transparent, so then you can track 
progress and evaluate your actions and how they're  

performing. It is improving, but it's still so far 
short of what we needed, especially the granular  

disaggregated level. We are still often quoting 
many of the kind of same headline-level statistics  

which, granted, a decade ago, even some of those 
headline statistics were difficult to get your  

hands on, but to think that even just at that 
basic building block of understanding and fully  

gasping the size of the problem, there is still a 
long way to go, to go alongside the solutions. 
 

I saw the cabinet secretary also nodding at that. 
Can you tell us a little bit about what you know,  

but perhaps also of what you don't know 
about gender participation in Kenya's  

energy sector? Including access, 
workforce participation and other areas?
 

Well, I think as has been observed, this is one 
of the last bastions of women's participation,  

and there has to be very deliberate action towards 
it. We are a little bit better, because we rank  

about 35% of the workforce in the energy sector 
is women; 15% of those are in senior technical  

and managerial positions. The managing director 
and CEO of our generating company is a woman,  

performing very well. Our utility has been having 
a problem, but the managing director is now a  

woman, the chair of the board is a woman. To push 
for the reform and transformation of that utility,  

and you're beginning to see a positive trajectory. 
Here, a case study that shows the women can turn  

around the sector. So I think there something here 
in terms of just demonstrating the possibilities  

of this. But I think behind focus a little bit on 
education. And the importance of keeping girls in  

school. It ties with a lot of other things that 
you're talking about here, so whether it is  

clean cooking so they can use their time to be in 
school, whether it is electrification of schools,  

so they can have an extra hour for study, whether 
it is a school-feeding programmes, the sanitary  

pads programmes, all these things tie to keep 
girls in school, and therefore able to train  

to engage with the energy sector and be a force 
that can be recruited into the sector. I agree  

totally it does not have to be technical. It does 
not have to be engineering. The MD I'm talking  

about is a lawyer and she's doing perfectly 
well. We need a range of skills, actually. 
 

The role model effect, not something specifically 
mentioned on our graph, sparse I can see,  

but once you have a woman in a position like 
that, obviously, that has implications for  

others. Let me go to Minister Rizvanolli with 
the same request that you talk a little bit  

about the structure barriers that you're seeing 
in Kosovo, what you know and what you don't know,  

whether data is also available that can help 
you essentially to work to bring more women in.
 

This is at that topic that we've started 
to analyse in recent years. We know the  

share of women is quite low, half of the global 
average of representation of women in the sector.  

And this clearly sneezed changing. Some of the 
structural barriers in Kosovo are the same as  

those faced in other countries. Indeed, for women 
in the energy sector, I mean. There are areas  

related to the lowest rate of women studying in 
... due to gender norms but I'm happy to say that  

there are indications this is challenging, in 
energy, and related areas, such as computer  

engineering, mechanical engineering, we are 
seeing a higher share of women. However, we  

also have great examples like energy policy course 
provided by our IT Kosovo in which 71% of - 71% of  

students are women. I think that goes to show 
that perhaps also the structure of professors that  

are teaching, the way it is marketed can play a 
positive role in attracting women into the course.  

Into a subject that is traditionally considered 
male subject. We have to call it what it is,  

sometimes. Women face discrimination in the 
labour market. I see cases of qualified women  

including some of whom I'm happy to say work in 
my cabinet now, who have been refused for jobs and  

they were simply told in a job interview this 
is more of a man's job, and knowing their  

qualifications and their friends, I know that 
they've been more qualified compared to the man,  

because they attended a specific programme that 
was dedicated to women being educated in the US  

for renewable energy courses, and there is no 
such programme for men. So I think in this kind  

of sort of social experiment, it becomes clear 
that part of the problem we are dealing with  

is discrimination and we need to fight that. We 
need to call out the people to raise awareness,  

they're doing it and doing it in an open 
way which is very worrying, actually,  

because who actually say that means that not 
only are you discriminating, but you find that  

completely normal and that is something that 
is completely unacceptable. In the workplace  

when women are present in energy companies, 
transmission operator regulators, sometimes,  

actually often we see that they are facing 
the glass ceiling, they're not promoted, and  

sometimes it is indicated that this is precisely 
due to their gender, and due to their primary  

caretaking role in the family which doesn't 
enable them to dedicate fully to their jobs, or  

that is the perception of course. Here I'm happy 
to say we have improvements in women in leadership  

roles. Now, among board members of publicly 
owned enterprises, operators and regulatory  

authorities in the energy sector, we have 
seven out of 28 or 25% that are women. However,  

here too I think we need to be aware of an issue 
in that these boards are selected by government  

and/or parliament, and I would really like to see 
more women being promoted in their job, in their  

work places, rather than this being a top-down 
approach. However, I think this is a good start,  

and these women will be role models for others, 
and once, what we've seen also in other areas,  

political representation, is that once women 
are given a chance, even if it is by quotas,  

or other affirmative measures, their 
colleagues and people recognise the talent  

and recognise there is no reason for to be - quite 
often, they're more dedicated at their jobs than  

men, and then they are promoted, so 
I think we are on a good path here. 
 

I see that Sheila has ...
I wanted to say there is evidence  

behind what you're saying. McKenzie did a 
study of 100 companies in the energy sector,  

and they showed that the companies that had women 
in their boards, and their leadership positions,  

three to one outperformed in terms of delivering 
to the shareholders and to the bottom line, yes,  

being better, being better companies. So they 
were able to deliver returns to their shareholders  

by having gender diversity and gender parity 
within their board and leadership positions.  

There is evidence for that 
conducted by some of the leading,  

in the market leading research 
ers in companies and in markets 
 

Sheila, picking up on the point of networking, 
Rizvanolli told us that these women have been  

part of a networking programme to go to the US and 
learn about renewable energy yet they come back  

and face pushback. You run a network. Can you tell 
us what you're seeing in terms of the positive  

effects of networking? And do you also see your 
members or women who have been through the energy  

network facing pushback in the same kind of way?
That is something we do see. That when women enter  

into the workplace, the work environment is just 
so difficult that they end up leaving the sector.  

So that it is really important not only to promote 
women's entry into the workplace, but promote  

their stay and retention, and also advancement in 
that, by changing the workplace, having workplace  

policies that are gender-responsive that 
are really important and having leadership.  

So we do see key measures that support 
that - one like I said actively and  

intentionally trying to change the workplace 
environment. But, also, engaging men as well,  

and making the leaders and most of our 
leaders within these companies are men,  

change agents, and I think honourable minister, 
your country, and your Ministry of Energy,  

has been one of those examples where we've seen 
your predecessor, who was a man, the Principal  

Secretary was a man, but to put gender to the 
forefront where can be Kenya and Ministry of  

Gender has its own standalone energy policy. 
You're making efforts to decentralised that  

to the devolution you have in your country, not 
just at the central level but also at the county  

level. So I think leadership also shown by those 
that are in key positions, to be change agents  

is really very important. Mentorship: we 
talked about role models. Mentorship is really  

important. Role models are really important. 
And I do think also encouraging not just STEM,  

but certainly STEM education is really important. 
When I was at the University of Zambia,  

we first entered into natural sciences, all of us 
had a first basic natural science, and then after  

that, you went to specialise whether you did 
medicine, or engineering. There were no women  

allowed into engineering, and absolutely no women 
allowed to enter the front door of the mining. So  

I do think still in technical and STEM education, 
you need to have that. Of course that is changing.  

But I wanted to say indeed we can have gender 
parity, and gender diversity in all fields,  

but also technical fields is important. 
I have to say small anecdote, when I was a PhD  

researcher, doing work on mining in Africa, I was 
in Ghana at the Ashanti Gold Mine at that time,  

and I was told that I couldn't go down in the 
mine because women bring bad luck to miners!  

I did go down, but essentially 
dressed up like a man! So,  

sorry, slight personal anecdote there. But let 
me ask Thomas, because we do have men at the  

centre of our graph here. And, Sheila just talked 
about the need to bring men along. How, if at all,  

do you do that in the work that you do 
to try to change attitudes amongst men?
 

Again, for me, it comes back to role models, and 
promoting the good work of women cooperatives.  

So we are trying to - I give you an example. In 
December, we organised a similar session like  

this one, run by refugees only, and we invited 
deliberately more women to the podium than men,  

and one of our biggest challenges, and it is 
coming back to your point about taking care,  

the care taking role of women, actually, one of 
the biggest challenges which we in a way also  

underestimated or did not foresee was was timing. 
So we had a couple of - we had one woman dialling  

in from Bangladesh, and the time was for the 
conference was seen in European afternoon,  

and we would were told, well, after three 
o'clock, the women have to take care of the kids,  

and do the meals, and everything else, so we 
then changed the timing of the conference, and  

this something is - obviously, we also were men 
in the team and we didn't think about this, and  

that was a lesson learned, and an education from 
our side. We have have been to be very conscious,  

when we talk about this gender topic, when we try 
to promote women, we have to make sure that we  

also do this in a way that they can respond. 
Thank you very much. Dan, I mentioned role  

models a moment ago, and I know that, in fact, 
CEM C3E campaign is designed to spotlight role  

models. Can you tell us a little bit about 
what you do, and what impact you're seeing?
 

Absolutely. Let me also just pick up on that 
last point briefly, if I may. Look, I think  

education and role models applies as much to 
men and women. I had the privilege to work  

with many amazing women over my career in the 
energy sector over many years, too many, maybe,  

and I'm currently very privileged to head a team 
that is two thirds women. And they inspire and  

impress me every single day. And so that is just 
one example that I get to live and breathe, and  

I'm sure that many others do too, and we need to 
bring those into the light. Back to your question,  

there's been this initiative since 2010. It's 
about to change its name to Equality and Energy  

Transitions to capture more broadly what is 
its core aim. It's co-led by the governments of  

Canada, Italy, and the US, but it's got 14 
governments and many other actors participating in  

it besides. And while the initiative has got many 
aspects to it, many of them play into this issue  

of role models, so if I just highlight a couple, 
the first is we've got an ambassador's programme.  

We have an international cohort of women 
ambassadors working in the energy sector,  

our current ambassadors are from Austria, 
China, Chile, Finland, the United States,  

and they do a great job at helping to attract 
talent and inspire the next generation of female  

leaders in the clean energy sector, through a 
range of events, engagements, mentoring, those  

kinds of things. Secondly is the establishment 
and actually it is something very dear to my  

heart every year, in our ministerial meeting, 
of your of an international awards programme,  

so we can spotlight and showcase the really great 
examples of what is going on around the world,  

and recognise and celebrate those 
examples and make sure that people see  

those inspirational examples. And the 
third is by organising a whole range of  

high -level events across the year, culminating in 
our ministerial meeting. Gender equality is always  

a core part. I say to our ministerial host every 
year, did changes from one country to another  

every year. You get to spotlight the particular 
area of clean energy that is important to you  

in your year, but there is one thing that we must 
spotlight every year, and it is gender equality,  

and that is a non-negotiable for us. You 
have to have it in every single year. Again,  

a very important part of raising awareness. I'm 
very lucky this year we're being hosted by the  

United States in September. The US Secretary 
of Energy is herself a great role model and  

very passionate on this topic. So I know we 
are going to have a really great event there,  

and she's really again going to put this 
at the centre of our ministerial meeting. 
 

Indeed she is. I'm not sure whether it was in your 
last meeting, but at one of the energy meetings I  

attended last year, by Zoom, of course, her first 
words were, "My hair is on fire about this topic!"  

What you've just said brings us to another issue I 
would very much like to get everyone to say a few  

words about, which is international co-operation. 
A chief came of the BETD is always to talk about  

how we can share experiences and work together. 
Let's talk about where co-operative initiatives  

are important in advancing gender equality, 
and I would like to ask all of you to briefly  

address it. Do also respond to what you're 
hearing from each other while we do that.
 

Thank you very much, Melinda. Critical, because 
of the scale of commitment that is required,  

and the cross-sector linkages that are 
required. If we are saying this is about a just,  

fair, and inclusive transition, then collaboration 
must be within the nation across government,  

across society, but beyond the country, and 
that is where international co-operation becomes  

a critical one. In this case, the policies 
of the international level must align with  

this international commitment. So there must be 
national policies that are facilitating access  

of women in this sector, that are facilitating 
the effective participation, and this is where  

I was turning it on to questions around access 
to finance. The right financing frameworks,  

the finance that is affordable, because we know 
in energy, that is where there is big money,  

and that is big money where big boys are. I think 
we have to create windows specifically that are  

targeting support for women initiatives 
for clean energy, for women initiatives to  

prospecting for the right resources, for 
generation, to engage in the transmission,  

to provide for the security of the grid 
systems, and the distribution lines. 
 

So you have particular concrete examples 
of that you would like to share?
 

I think it has to be everybody. I think 
the conversations we are having here,  

and we have had the conversations around green 
hydrogen. It is big, right? But it has to cascade  

down to the small as well. Otherwise we are going 
to have women following behind the development in  

green hydrogen, so it has to be delivered, and 
so we need to land this to where it matters,  

where it is with the people. 
Thank you very much.
 

I agree with what has been said. I 
think one way to start certainly is  

to try to share experiences of what 
is working. This is a relatively  

new challenge that I would say globally we are 
embarking on. Learning from different initiatives,  

sharing experiences is very important. For short 
haul countries such as Kosovo, it is particularly  

also important to look into co-operation 
in the education and training sectors.  

Scholarship schemes, setting up programmes that 
are dedicated, either dedicated to women, or make  

sure that women are at least equally represented, 
are very important here, and this is something  

for which we need support and co-operation 
with more developed countries that are more  

advanced in both in the energy transition, 
as well as skills for energy transition. 
 

How did that co-operation come 
about from women in renewables  

goes over to the US to work with companies 
in that sector? Who was sponsoring that?
 

That was implemented in co-operation with 
the Millennium Challenge Corporation,  

the US agency, and actually we're now working 
on a programme, another programme on energy  

transition which will have also significant 
component on women 's inclusion, which will  

include in addition to women skills training, 
include incentives for employers to hire women,  

and to make the workplace more women-friendly, 
through grants, internships, or other initiatives.  

We are also planning an award for the best 
workplace for women, and have annual awards  

for employers in the energy sector that are 
friendly to women, and these are some cases  

where international co-operation has proven 
extremely important. Internships for women also,  

were initiated ... and won gender equality across 
the board is one of our key priorities, and we are  

taking a more active role in promoting within 
the government to women's inclusion, and, as on  

leading by example, it is one way in which we are 
doing that. In my ministry, for instance, out of  

seven interns that we have hired, six are women. 
In my cabinet, two or three out of six are women.  

This is to some extent intentional. However, 
it is definitely not discrimination of men  

over women here, simply recognising the talent and 
the potential that is out there, and making sure  

that women are not overlooked in the process. 
Thank you very much. Let me go over to Sheila, and  

also, maybe a little bit more detail about ENERGIA 
itself and how you're working internationally.
 

International co-operation is important, 
but international co-operation  

needs to be also transformative, and, 
for us, transformative, needs it needs  

to be multi-stakeholder, so it needs to bring 
together different governments, civil society,  

private sector, and also grassroots 
organisations, and women's organisations.  

And to give a concrete example, the United 
Nations industrial development organisation,  

together with ENERGIA and the Global Women's 
Transition have been stakeholders in the Energy  

Compact, hosted under the high-level dialogue 
on the energy secretariat which was a dialogue  

that was convened under the General Assembly 
last year in September in order to continue to  

build the momentum to the SDGs. We only have eight 
years to work towards the SDGs. SDG7 is on amongst  

the 17, so we need to achieve that. There is a 
call to commitments and commitments to action,  

and one on a gender transformative and 
just an inclusive transition was in the  

gender and energy compact that has launched with 
50 organisations. Everyone who is here is welcome  

to join that. The government of Kenya is part 
of that, and also the Clean Energy Minister is  

part of the Compact. In terms of ENERGIA, we 
are an international network, and we convene 36  

organisations across 18 
countries in Asia and Africa.  

We've been working at the intersectionality 
of women's empowerment and energy for the past  

26 years, since the Beijing platform for action 
which called for gender mainstreaming as a means  

to achieve gender equality and empowerment in 
different sectors, so we wanted to provide an  

institutional platform to do this in the energy 
sector in developing countries. One initiative we  

are very, very proud of is our women economic 
empowerment programme where we support 8,000  

women entrepreneurs to run businesses in very 
- in what we call - these are areas that have  

no or limited access to energy, and women 
are driving energy markets and distribution  

chains in this area. By doing so, they're 
bringing their Westminster to the communities,  

and 20% is a women economic empowerment, but 
20% of the groups are of the entrepreneurs and  

the enterprises are also run by men. Because I 
think once you start working with women, it is  

automatically inclusive. They just bring everybody 
along. So, and just linking to that, I like the  

point that Dan made about the accountability, and 
I think a part of accountability is financing and  

investing. I didn't want to us leave this 
platform without saying that we need much  

more financing to really scale up and accelerate 
the level of investment and financing in this. 
 

Tell us what you think is necessary and 
effective to do that? Examples are welcome?
 

Yes, so maybe, just building from what Thom 
said, just do it. I think, Tom was talking about,  

we were talking about the humanitarian 
help, for instance, an example of this,  

is how the government of the Netherlands, 
you said, Tom, has said 10% of their - 
 

Special development assistance 
for the non-acronymers!
 

If we can have targets for companies and 
government investors, saying 10% or more ambitious  

numbers are going to go scale-up gender equality, 
I think it's going to, it will really move the  

dial. I see Thomas wants to say something! 
Please, thank you.
 

Thank you very much. I'm actually still 
thinking and on what you said, minister, about  

the big money is where the boys are. I think 
there is one difference, maybe, micro lending  

and micro credits. This is a very concrete example 
or suggestion how to bring more money for women  

empowering projects into the market. And, for 
example, if you look at one of the leading  

micro financing platforms. If you talk to these 
colleagues, they will tell you they prefer giving  

money to women because they pay back better. They 
have less default rates. So there is an incentive  

on this level, at least, to actually offer 
more financing capital to women, and, if you  

look at you have the website, you see hundreds 
of great projects from women all over the world,  

for example, I don't know, looking for a 
solar home system, have lights at their  

houses for - looking for a small solar home system 
to power a water pump to irrigate the fields,  

and all of these wonderful examples where 
people can lend money directly to these people,  

and then they earn a living with this new solar 
technology. This is one of the few areas where  

it's also very concrete opportunity for 
everyone in in room to be engaged. 
 

Could you keep the mic for a second. I wanted to 
ask you, since we do have a number of entries here  

on our poll that talk about education 
and skills, and training, and is to on,  

to say a little bit about Unitar. I know that you 
have essentially a training programme that has  

customisable learning solutions. Do you have 
one specific targeted at gender and energy?
 

Yes. So Unitar it is the United Nations 
institute for training and research. It is  

mainly directed to every external partner 
for the United Nations, the host countries,  

other international organisations, so less 
on internal staff. And I actually looked at  

this this morning. When you type in "gender" in 
our catalogue, 40 different programmes appear.  

Not all of them obviously related to gender and 
energy, but, for example, there was be one around  

gender and climate change, and the implications 
for women when you talk about the climate cases,  

but one about gender and energy in trade. 
Also, a bit of an under served topic.  

The programmes we're running vary each day, some 
online and some in person. Do look it up. It's  

interesting. From our experience of the space, 
what we are having similar challenges to find  

women working on the energy space, but it's less 
challenging to find women in general working in  

NGOs, for example, in the field. So what we are 
trying to do now is set up a programme where  

we can match women work ing NGOs together 
with energy companies and organise it in a  

holistic programme over two years with 
awareness-raising programmes and personal  

development programmes, to promote at 
the end more women in our sector. 
 

Thank you very much. We have about eight 
minutes left on the clock. I would like  

to ask for all of you to say a few closing words 
and bring this back to the energy transition, and  

boost ing renewables, because when I was 
looking at this area, preparing for the panel,  

I found myself wondering what is unique about 
renewable energy that could be positive for  

gender advancement ? What occurred to me was 
local, decentralisation. As you look forward,  

what gives you reason for optimism about the 
gender energy nexus in the energy transition?  

You can tell us about the challenges but - I'm 
also interested to hear the hero side of it,  

the opportunities and what they mean.
Yes, I think there is a lot of potential.  

When you start from such a low base, of 
course, there is always a lot of potential  

but particularly the energy transition I think 
gives unique opportunities to sort of de couple  

this gender and energy occupation nexus that 
is there probably for no good reason. In a  

country such as Kosovo which relies highly on 
lignite for energy generation, I can see that  

the future will bring better inclusion just by 
virtue of decoupling mining which is a highly  

male-dominated sector from energy generation, and 
other aspects. The fact that renewable energy is  

more skill-intensive, than more traditional 
technology, then it will probably become so in the  

future. I think also gives more possibilities 
for women, and will be another reason  

to be optimistic for women's inclusion. These 
are just one of the few aspects, apart from  

a general level of awareness that is much higher 
now compared to what it has been previously.
 

Thank you very much. I agree with the minister. 
The first thing is framing this matter. How we  

frame it. It is very important that if we 
are looking for a just and fair transition,  

that provides freedom, then we must see renewables 
as an avenue for this freedom, because if it has  

a multiplier effect across many capabilities of 
women. Electrification, rural electrification, for  

example, by renewables provides women with more 
time to be productive, provides better health,  

provides their children the opportunities 
for better education, and for them to be  

more productive in the future. There is no doubt 
that women are easier in adopting this transition,  

so it is really an offer for their freedom. I 
think framing this must be taken in these terms.  

Secondly, if we agree that diverse workforces 
are stronger and more effective, then this  

issue about gender equality and involvement 
becomes a business imperative. We need to  

frame it as a business imperative, so that the 
investors see the opportunity for growing their  

business through this gender equality. Thirdly, 
leadership matters. Leadership matters. We have to  

have models, and it is very good that male leaders 
are becoming champions. Certainly my president  

is a champion and we think President ... is a 
feminist. In a imposes a duty of care that are  

in leadership in the energy sector to be models 
and to do targeted actions that promote women  

and girls in this sector. Finally, policies 
matter. They are critical. They have to be  

targeted, policy, there has to be alignment from 
the local to the national to the international.  

We can have policies, but we need to land them. 
In the case of our country, 30% of procurement  

is preserved for women and girls and 
youth, but, if they're not facilitated,  

then they cannot access that opportunity. 
And that is the linkage in terms of  

collaboration, in terms of facilitation, in terms 
of creating sensitive frameworks for access,  

particularly for finance, particularly for 
rules and regulations, but particularly for  

support and for support for the women. 
This of course leads to accountability.  

There must be a way in which we can look back 
and say how well are we doing, and what can we  

correct and we move towards this path.
I don't know what is left to be said.  

I think our honourable ministers have 
said it all. I think renewable energy  

does have a means of - it should be international 
to a just and inclusive energy transition  

because of what you have said, it is the type of 
the energy that it is makes it applicable to areas  

that do not have access to energy, and being able 
to drive energy in that way. We've seen countries  

that have accelerated their electrification rates 
by having this integrated approach of a grid  

and decentralised energy which can also feed into 
centralised energy, so that is one. I fully agree  

that it is the, it is how it is positioned. 
It is the narrative on how it is positioned.  

Local ownership is important. The main renewable 
countries are outside the continent of Africa,  

so driving that local ownership, and that 
local ownership in a way that proposals  

women's businesses is going to be central. 
Minister, I think it's not just the policies,  

but I think it is the political narrative. 
I'm happy that you spoke about His Excellency  

Kinata, who was in his high-level dialogue 
on energy in the first three minutes  

talked about cooking energy being really, 
really important, and being important to  

women's energy needs, so I think it is changing 
that. I think it is who you bring to the table.  

Most of the time, it's either the minister, 
or myself who are the only women, and I'm  

usually in these meetings with Thomas and with 
Dan. You have one gender expert at the table.  

We need to be bringing many more women to the 
table to decision-making tables. It's not the lone  

gender experts or the lone Sheila who should be 
there, and these should be - these voices should  

be extended to the grassroots. We are going to 
have the sustainability energy forum in May.  

I'm looking to see with our ministers there a 
very strong delegation of our women grassroots  

women there. Like I said, it's also about money. 
Us following the money, and really bringing  

investments and money into the sector. Thank 
you. And just the last call for everyone to  

join the Gender and Energy Compact. If you go 
to the website, it will show you how to join.  

Join the movement for a gender-transformative, 
a just and inclusive energy transition. 
 

You heard it, dear audience! 
Go there, and sign up. Dan?
 

It has largely been said. I would highlight 
something very quickly, which is we are absolutely  

seeing within our overall work programme 
and our community that gender equality is  

it part of a energy transition is going to be 
integral. We talked a lot about ongoing learning,  

sharing of experiences, figuring out and sharing 
what works, building that supportive community,  

but also there is a related campaign called 
Equal By 30 which established a commitment  

for equality for women in the energy sector by 
2030. It's one of our most successful campaigns  

across the whole programme. We've not just 
got governments at national or region level,  

but companies and organises of all types all 
over the world signing up to that commitment,  

working through using our tool kit to figure out 
their own action plans to help make it a reality,  

but of course we can always and do want more. If 
anyone wants to inspired by this discussion today  

go on to equalby30.org, do it today. Thanks.
What makes me optimistic, and building on what  

Sheila and our colleague from Kenya said, when 
you look at decentralised renewables and cooking,  

the clients are women, and that is where 
the money is, and that is often where the  

decision power in the household is, so that 
makes me optimistic that in the future we see  

more women in this space, and hopefully in ten 
years, we shouldn't have sessions like this! 
 

We will see about that. Thank you so much to 
all of you for this really fascinating and also  

inspiring discussion. I think it's given all of 
us a lot to not only think about, but to do, and I  

appreciate your being part of it. Let's give them 
a warm round of applause, ladies and gentlemen.


