The global drive to zero emission energy is 
at the heart of tackling climate change. To  

achieve the turnaround towards carbon neutrality, 
countries need to take more ambitious action.  

In this decade, one of the key fields of action 
is the energy sector from fossil to renewables.  

The solutions exist. It is now our 
responsibility to implement them and  

ensure the successful global energy transition. 
Now is the time to turn words into action. 
 

And welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. 
We continue now with our first ministerial  

panel on how we rise to the challenge that 
all of our opening speakers have described,  

how we turn words into action and shape a 
way forward that will get us where we need  

to go quickly. Ladies and gentlemen, here in the 
Weltsaal, pleads take your seats, please take your  

seats. I would be grateful so we can begin, and 
close the doors to the room so we have somewhat  

more quite in the room. And we've heard, 
the remainder of this decade is absolutely  

crucial. The most recent UN emissions gap report 
reveals that commitments to reach Net Zero by 2050  

will limit global warming to just over two degrees 
only if countries act on them now. That is by  

scaling up their contributions and action plans by 
2030. The energy transition is key to doing that,  

and nowhere more so than amongst the heavyweight 
economies here in this room on stage, not only  

their share of global primary energy consumption, 
but their massive combined financial resources  

mean their efforts will decide whether we 
succeed or fail in closing the temperature gap.  

So how do we effectively accelerate the shift 
to clean energy? How do we phase coal out  

faster? And how do we take citizens along 
ensuring a just and equitable transition?  

Those are some of the topics on this panel, 
and we have an outstanding group of speakers  

to address them. It is a great pleasure to 
welcome them. I will keep the introductions  

brief in the transaction of time, and I'm going to 
ask all of you, dear citizens dear excellencies,  

to keep your remarks to the allotted time 
of two minutes. It's a pleasure to welcome  

His Excellency, Arifin Tasrif, Minister of 
resources in Indonesia, sitting next to him,  

Abubakar Aliyu, Minister of power nor Nigeria, 
and Leila Benali, from the kingdom of Morocco,  

and next to her is seated His Excellency, Dr 
Tom Mowbray, head Ahmed Mohina, and Dr Christian  

Bruch, President and Chief Executive Officer of 
Siemens Energy, with and with us is Commissioner  

of Energy for the European Commission, Kadri 
Simson. We are eager to hear from you with your  

questions and short comments. Our Twitter hashtag 
is ##. #betd22. If you're a digital guest, you can  

send us questions and also to vote on our audience 
polls. And I would like to start with a really  

quick poll and then we will look at the results 
a little bit later. Here is our poll question:  

how to enable change and increase the momentum 
for urgent energy transition action. Here are our  

choices: support more ambitious NDCs, amplify the 
role of nuclear energy, promote a flexible power  

system fit for future challenges, and/or help 
countries adopt the best policies to sell excite  

investments in the clean energy sector. We've 
heard all of those mentioned so far this morning.  

We're going to take another look at the results 
later on. I would like now to begin by asking our  

panel participants to tell us how your country, 
or your company, is prioritising transformation  

of the energy sector over the next eight years to 
2030, and how you're rising to the challenge named  

in our title of Transforming Ambition into Action. 
I will begin if I may with Minister Benali. After  

is one of the pioneers of the Enengiewende. 
You've transformed your energy industry  

in recent years. Tell us what you see are the 
main challenges going from ambition to action? 
 

Thank you. I will try to be brief as you 
required, but I would fors like to thank  

the Federal Government of Germany for inviting 
us to this wonderful and first in-person meeting.  

I will not spend too much time to talk about 
Morocco's commitments. We've been committed to the  

climate change issue I think more than 15 years 
ago, and this was a really voluntary political  

choice made by His Majesty the king at the time to 
put Morocco on the path of sustainable development  

which is why you have the Ministry of Energy 
Transition and Sustainability Development that I'm  

having the privilege of sharing and leading. I 
think when we talk about what is happening today,  

and I think during these difficult times, 
and the war that we have in Ukraine today,  

and this is trying to get post-Covid recovery 
on stage, I think the acceleration of energy  

transition is really a must, and Morocco 
as a country has been experiencing that  

at our level. So we are definitely committed more 
than ever, and I need to remind you of our NDCs,  

because that's in June 2021, Morocco has 
submitted an NDC with a new ambition of 45.5%  

of greenhouse gas emissions reduction by 2030, 
and my team here would like to remind ourselves,  

like to remind me always, that we are one of 
the few countries that submitted the NDC that is  

compatible with the global objective of reduction 
of global temperature of 1.5 degrees Celsius. So,  

I think key word number one is transparency of 
our NDC: we have indeed initiated some substantive  

work in the past. I would not want to spend a lot 
of time on the past. I really want to focus on the  

future. Morocco has had the privilege of being 
the President of the United Nations Environment  

Assembly in Nairobi Kenya four weeks ago which 
sets even higher expectations in our journey for  

an energy transition for sustainable development. 
We were in the process of developing of course our  

low-carbon development strategy for 2030 and 2050 
but again we want to put words into action when  

we do that. That is definitely in line with 
our new development model, something that  

we put together over the last couple of years, 
simply because we wanted to get away from  

the middle income trap, so our sustainable 
development strategy is in line with our new  

development model. Ladies and gentlemen, I think 
I would finish with a couple of words stating  

that indeed today, there are some numbers that 
are important to us. 52% of installed capacity  

based on the renewables before 2030, that's our 
target. We have 50 renewable energy projects now  

up and running, four gigawatts installed. We have 
more than 60 projects in the pipeline. ISA said at  

Copernicus that is COP26 not enough. Morocco has 
a stable political framework but we don't really  

have that, we have as you know quite competitive 
renewable potential. But that is not enough,  

indeed. We are working on that more stable yet 
evolving regulatory framework, and contractual  

framework, and we have for renewable energy 
and hydrogen a one-stop-shop that is here, our  

director at the ministry, when you want to meet a 
minister for investment, I think it is better to  

meet our one-stop-shop when it comes to renewable 
investment. So he is there. You need to meet him.  

But as Minister baby baby mentioned 
mentioned, we also made mistakes. We  

made the first-movers mistakes when it comes to 
investments, particular any in renewable energy,  

and we're learning from those mistakes, 
so I think that is lesson number one,  

and I would echo this conference theme: less 
words, more action. I would love it if one day,  

from Berlin, we stopped using the word "hydrogen" 
and you're the word two dollars hydrogen  

because that would bring in the 
financial sector, the policymakers  

and so on. Last message: at COP26 Morocco 
agreed to the objectives, but power coal means  

access to sustainable sources of gas, access 
to the international LNG market. At the time,  

we used Ukraine as a benchmark. I never thought at 
the time that history will be faster, that history  

will prove us right. So I just say let's focus on 
an integrated approach, and an inclusive approach,  

and let's be faster than history. Thank you. 
Thank you very much. I'm going to take with you  

your remark about two-dollar hydrogen when 
we go to our hydrogen panel later on today.  

Minister Tasrif, Indonesia is also a 
beacon for other emerging economies.  

Please tells about your beacon strategy to 
achieve a higher renewable energy share by 2025? 
 

As you know, Indonesia is producing, we are 
blessed that we have big resources of oil, gas,  

even the coal, that we have our friend countries 
to supply them with the energy, but right now,  

we realise that the future, we need the clean 
energy to have a better climate in our lives.  

In order to accelerate the things, but 2025, we 
tried to reach at least 25% of our energy mix.  

Recently, we have 11.7%. We have 72g 72 gigawatts, 
so we have an intention in the next five years,  

we are going to shut down at least 5.5 
gigawatts of the coal-powered plant, and  

try to substitute it with the renewable energy. We 
did several activities on it, the SOS mentioned in  

the subject from ambition to action, we do 
several separate programmes. For instance,  

the tropical countries, we want to get 
the solar power, we plan to develop 7.8,  

almost eight gigawatts in the next ten years. 
In the other side, we have the programme to  

intensify the use of electric vehicles. Last 
couple of weeks, we just launched a new first  

production of the electric vehicles, and 
then also we have the programme convert  

our motorcycle. The motorcycle is popular 
in Indonesia. We have a plan to convert it  

in the next ten years, about 120 million, which 
is the consumption of the fuel itself, it could  

fall into 1.5 million barrels of oil a day. We 
can save a lot of fuel, and then fuel, and that  

is why this clean energy is important in our 
country. This activity will create a lot of  

economic activity in our country, 
so when we're talking about  

how much is required to convert these kinds of 
motorcycles, we think about 60 to 80 billion  

US dollars to convert this. There is another 
programme also now we are being prepared. 
 

Thank you very much. We're going to come back 
to the topic you mentioned at the outset - coal.  

We will talk about that a little bit later 
on. But let me go now to Minister Aliyu, and  

climate change is happening now in Nigeria. 
How does that impact the way you're shaping  

the energy transition plan to define a pathway to 
Net Zero while you also lift millions of people  

out of poverty and driving economic growth? 
The energy transition is different  

from country to country. Generally, 
it may mean phasing out the carbon  

generation in the general supply of electricity. 
Isn't it in my country in Nigeria, the way that we  

are approaching it is we have a serious 
challenge with the National Grid. It can only  

be able to meet up with less than 60% of demand of 
electricity in Nigeria. So, the demand are being  

resorting to using fossil fuel generation, 
personal small generators, firewood, and things  

like that, which also contribute to the carbon 
emissions. So our approach is to first of all  

strengthen our grid to be able to carry 
a lot of operational capacity, so that  

most of the population will come back to the grid.  

Now, alongside, we also are developing 
renewable energies to ramp up  

on the grid. We can only do that if the grid 
is strong to carry that. We have progress  

going on in the renewable energy, like 700 
megawatts solar, and the water, hydro-electricity,  

which is over 90% completion now. We have 
40 megawatts hydro-which is hydro, which is  

already completed, and we have another one 
which is 40 megawatts. Among the ones like the  

solar isolated - spread across the country, solar 
electric mini grids. This can only come across the  

country, when the grid is strong enough to carry 
all the mixes. So we have a policy which is our  

vision of 30, 30, 30, signed by the government. 
That means by 2030, we should be able to upgraded  

the operational capacity to 30 megawatts; 
and 30% of that must come from renewable.  

Our President also made a declaration at COP26 
that by 2060, we should be Net Zero, by 2060,  

and we have developed our own pathway which 
we're working towards that. Our transition fuel  

up to 2030 is going to be gas, which we are 
working towards policy to make investors do more  

of the gas than the other fossils. This is our way 
we approach the energy transition. Thank you. 
 

Thank you very much. Let me pick up with you, 
Deputy Minister Mohina on the point about  

grid stability, because, in fact, Egypt also has 
rapidly rising demand for power, so I wonder if  

you could tell us a little bit about how you 
plan to achieve a 42% renewable share by 2035  

which is your goal, and, at the same 
time, ensure a flexible power system? 
 

Thank you so much. First, I would like to tell 
you we apologise for His Excellency because he  

would like to participate, but, unfortunately, 
due to some sudden circumstances, he couldn't  

arrive, and he couldn't leave Cairo. If 
you please, let me switch to the Arabic  

language because it's my language. 
May you use the headphones, please? 
 

Ladies and gentlemen, you will need your 
headsets if you're not an Arabic speaker.
 

We will give them 30 seconds to 
get those headsets on. By the way,  

I have mine right here in my ear, so I 
am listening to every word you say! 
 

We also entered into commitments in 2015, and 
since Egypt has launched very ambitious climate  

change programme, we wanted to put together 
a strategy for climate change mitigation  

for an inclusive change towards renewables. 42% 
is our goal by 2035. It's a very ambitious goal,  

and this also requires ambitious 
measures that we need to implement.  

We have a change in many of our rules, 
and we have revised our laws and  

created new laws in order to create 
the necessary regulatory framework,  

and for instance, we have given more 
rights to investors as regard to land use,  

because investors can now also invest from 
abroad into renewables; we also made agreements  

for the purchase of energies over a time 
period of 25 years, so long-term agreements,  

and luckily, in 2021 and 2022, we were 
able to achieve our mid-term goal.  

We've reached a share of 22% 
of renewables. As regards the  

modernizing of our energy system in Egypt, we 
were able to reach, achieve more than 50%. In the  

50%, we were able to replace the use 
of coal and fossil fuels by renewables.  

But we could only achieve it this based on the 
political support from the government in Egypt.  

So we were able to launch the largest solar 
project in the Middle East and northern Africa.  

Talking about 20 megawatts. And 32 
private sector investors are involved.  

So it also has a very interesting 
cost structure for the investors.  

So there was a lot of involvement 
from the private sector  

within Egypt and from abroad. It 
has been a very attractive project.  

Two cents per kilowatt hour of solar energy, and a 
very good price for wind energy could be achieved,  

so this reflects the great opportunities 
for renewables in Egypt. Our plan for 2035  

also reflects this, and now we have to look at 
the challenges that we have already overcoming  

the ... that we need to face. Now, even though 
we have a very promising project for the storage  

of energy that we have launched as a 
programme, are we currently trying to  

foster other technologies for energy storage in 
order to be able to even increase and expand our  

targets. We want to - we're looking at green 
hydrogen. When we expand, and further develop  

this new technology, then this is a great 
opportunity for the shift towards renewables,  

and we can build connections with other countries. 
We also need technical standards that have to be  

agreed on, and the system operators in 
the neighbouring countries, for instance,  

in Jordan, and we have to work together with Arab 
network, Libya, and with the south, with Sudan,  

and Saudi Arabia. So we are also connected 
to the grid via Cyprus and Greece,  

so we will also provide input there, and we 
will also feed in the renewables there. 
 

Thank you very, very much. I want to try to come 
back to the topic of international co-operation  

at the close of our panel if we have the time. 
Let me go to Commissioner Simson, we commissioner  

Simson, we heard that not only Germany but also 
Europe as a whole must drastically accelerate  

the clean energy transition also with 
the aim of boosting energy security and  

independence. That is here in Europe. How 
are you at EU level making that happen?  

What time frame do you think is actually 
feasible for this enormous shift? Where do  

you see the biggest challenges - and 
all of that briefly, if you would! 
 

Good morning, thank you for allowing me to join 
from Brussels. Unfortunately, I didn't join you  

for the opening speeches, but I had the 
chance to meet Minister Habeck yesterday,  

and we are aligned. The global energy landscape 
has changed drastically in the recent weeks.  

For us, while it may change our tactics, 
our strategies, the EU remains the same:  

we have an objective to become climate neutral, 
reaching Net Zero by 2050, and this has been  

enshrined in new law, and Russia's invasion 
of Ukraine has confirmed that our ... so,  

our response has been to move even faster in this 
direction, so reducing our dependency on fossil  

fuels, and on Russian fossil fuels in particular. 
In the short-term, we will diversify our  

supply routes, but the lasting solution is to 
accelerate the deployment of renewables, and more  

so to produce more renewable hydrogen, and to 
improve overall efficiency, so we will save.  

At global level, I think we can be more ambitious 
when we work together on common goals, the Paris  

Agreement is the best example, it is keeping us 
on track, the 1.5 degrees, it is pushing all of us  

to have more ambition, and relying on 
our international co-operation partners  

is vital. It is vital also for our ... and 
this is why we are strong supporters of  

multi-lateral co-operation, through IRENA, and 
the International Energy Agency, and all these  

entities that cat lies international co-operation 
catalyze ... we are in a position to support  

emerging and developing countries to  

reach our global energy climate goals, we 
cannot of course work alone. We must reinforce  

our alliances, and we must create new ones, and 
the European Union and Africa is a geographical  

priority for accelerating access to 
sustainable energy in the next decade,  

and Africa is an important partner for us to 
make the clean transition happen in the EU.  

I believe that there is a win-win situation 
in the EU in the Africa relationship  

in the field of energy relationship. This has 
enormous potential in the - and hydrogen, the EU  

is interested about these kinds of 
partnerships, and in the coming months,  

we will be working on building new hydrogen 
partnerships with our partner countries,  

and I hope that this co-operation will also help 
Africa to provide its citizens the secure and  

affordable access to energy. Thank you. 
Thank you very much, Commissioner,  

and I'm still hoping as I said, to come back 
to the deeper on the question of co-operation.  

Dr Bruch, we've heard a palpable sense of urgency 
here this morning on the energy transition. Would  

you say the same sense of urgency is being 
felt by industry? How do you seat risks in  

this accelerated timetable for reducing 
dependence particularly on natural gas? 
 

Thank you, and thank you very much for having me 
on the panel. The first would be absolutely yes.  

We should not underestimate the speed and the 
pressure which is in the industry, also simply  

if you see where the investments are going to. 
The key is then how do you turn it into action,  

right? I mean, the one thing is 
about raising ambitions, but for me,  

I miss at the moment really concrete actions 
over the next years, right and really changing  

things. We committed as a company ourselves 
to be carbon-neutral by 2030, working in being  

100% ... by renewable energy next year. We 
are frying to innovate these things because  

only a sustainable company will be invested in 
going forward. The pressure is absolutely high  

in the industry and this is in alignment with 
industry and policymakers is really, really  

crucial. And however, we are also a company which 
is confronted afterwards to implement things.  

And we are obviously a company which is cutting 
across all types of energies - from renewables  

like wind power, to gas power, or building 
the infrastructure like the electrical grid  

in between. And, at the moment, what 
we see is that today, in the industry,  

and in the politics, no price for sustainability. 
Our energy infrastructure has been built on the  

cheapest power price, right? And if you want to 
change it, we need to have a discussion in this  

society that we are willing to accept that. It 
is not an economic or a company issue, it's a  

societal issue. We also do not have a technology 
problem of driving energy transformation. We have  

a society discussion and we also have to be 
clear that also from our company perspective,  

we need to redirect investments into the areas 
where we need it. It was mentioned before that  

the amount of money you require for carbon 
neutral world is 50 trillion dollars, 57%  

developing countries. If you don't change these 
mechanisms, it will not work. And it is think the  

same companies, and the heat is actually on. I can 
today convince no investor to invest in my company  

if I don't have a clear plan on how do I drive 
energy transformation as an energy company. 
 

Thank you very much. You outlined some crucial 
priorities. Let's look at what the audience said  

earlier in answer to our poll about how do enable 
change and increase momentum. Could we look at  

the results, please? Let's take a look. The first 
answer that I'm seeing here with you how to help  

countries adopt the best countries to accelerate 
investment - 61% see that as the key driver,  

accelerating investment, and the policies to do 
so. Second, largest share, would be 31% saying  

promote a flexible power system which several of 
you mentioned. And then a very small share saying  

amplify the role of nuclear energy, interestingly 
enough, 6% on that, and supporting more ambitious  

NDCs, only 2%. I'm hoping that Dr Mohina is taking 
note of that, because his country will be sharing  

the next COP, and I expect you maybe hoped to 
see a larger share. We will come back to that  

in a moment. We have 15 minutes left for the rest 
of the topics I would like to try to discuss. So,  

I'm going to ask all of you to be really very 
brief if you would, and I want to start with the  

question of coal, because, of course, reducing 
coal has been a key objective at the COP26,  

trying to boost countries' speed in shifting 
toward the end of coal, and I would like to go,  

if I may to Commissioner Simson with a request for 
a brief answer. The current geopolitical crisis  

is a setback as a phase-in of coal as countries 
try to get off Russian natural gas?  
 

We know that this transition, it will affect 
disproportionately some countries and some  

regions, and some sectors, but we have to 
tackle these negative consequences, and we  

need - these need to be addressed. We are ready 
to do so, and but our plan it is actually, it  

is built to the previous proposals, so we 
have a comprehensive approach in place. We  

are supporting regions that rely on fossil fuels 
by just transition mechanisms, so we will protect  

our most vulnerable consumers, but then we will 
support - we will provide alternatives that are  

home-grown, and, of course, just transition is 
a key thing globally. The current situation in  

markets affected by Russia's aggression has 
made one thing clear, that the energy transition  

is important, not only to combat climate change 
but also to safeguard access to energy and keep it  

affordable. So to accelerate the shift away from 
fossil fuels so clean energy is necessary and this  

is what we are doing here in Europe, and where we 
are willing to support our partners globally. 
 

Minister Tasrif, your country is one of 
the biggest coal exporters in the world.  

At the COP26, you signed up of the Global Coal to 
Clean Power statement that would have you phase  

out coal in the 2040s. What is the 
biggest challenge you face briefly? 
 

We are one of the biggest coal producers, and our  

usage in our country is only 25% from what 
is our producing annually. From 75%, we have  

our countries to support the energy requirement. 
Well, there should be a strong commitment  

from all the countries to reduce their coal 
consumption, if only to eliminate their coal use.  

So, every country, they have their own 
programme. They have their own road map,  

so I think it there should be there should 
be a common goal. In our country itself,  

if we have to retire our coal power plan, 
following on a contractual basis, it has to be,  

if we finish by 200056, but right now 
2056, but now there is an initiative from  

financial the institutions to accelerate the coal 
retirement, so we've been discussing with several  

financial institutions to reduce it. The other 
problem that we are facing with is about the  

workers who are working in the mining sectors, 
so we have to prepare a programme in order how  

to make them survive after they lost their job? 
So this is a big challenge. As I mentioned to you,  

we are in the target to reach the Net Zero 
emission by 2060 and then also blessed with  

big source of renewables in our country. 
Thank you for mentioning the challenge of  

finding jobs for displaced workers. I would 
like to come back to the social side of the  

energy transition in a moment, but let me first 
go to Dr Bruch to ask you about another big  

challenge of getting off not only coal but other 
fossil fuel resources, namely stranded assets,  

legacy assets, valuable existing power 
plants, infrastructure, that were designed  

for fossil fuels and coal. Do they simply have 
to be written off, or to what degree can we truly  

repurpose something like coal-associated assets? 
You can do a lot, and we should be smart of using  

existing infrastructure to have a sensible way 
forward. I mean obviously, we particularly at the  

moment, coal is one thing, and the other thing is 
gas, obviously, and how do we make sure that week  

have a coal-to-gas and then a gas-to-renewables 
emissions? You can have a green ammonia injection  

and use it afterwards to stable yikes the grid 
which has a higher intake of renewable power  

and still have a low or no emission of the back-up 
operation when needed. So there are smart ways to  

do it. I think we should make sure that we steer 
the money invested into energy transformation  

really with the focus to decrease the maximum 
CO2 amount. I believe this will drive us to use  

existing infrastructure to refurbish it, to modify 
it, also to take our gases like hydrogen going  

forward. And having afterwards a set up by use 
also of some of the old assets, so it is possible  

in a different design, and it is also 
obviously something which will require  

a closed discussion between all 
parties collaborating in the market. 
 

Thank you very much. Again, that is a remark 
that I will take with me into our hydrogen  

panel because the topic of the degree to which 
we can repurpose hydrogen is of course currently  

a big debate. Let me now shift us to the social 
question again because of having an eye on the  

clock. It was mentioned by both ministers earlier 
this morning, that, in the aftermath of the  

pandemic and as a result of the crisis in Ukraine, 
people everywhere are feeling the pain of rising  

energy prices, and inflationary spiral that is, in 
fact, also exacerbating global hunger. So, it is  

obviously more crucial than ever that the energy 
transition really delivers benefits rather than  

additional burdens. I would like to ask 
several of you just to talk a little  

bit about what your country or institution is 
doing to work towards this aim, and, if I may,  

I'm going to start with Vice Minister Mohina, 
also to pick up on Egypt's role in coming in,  

being designated as President of COP27. We saw 
a fairly small share of the audience saying that  

more ambitious NDC would be a crucial driver, but 
we saw a large share of the audience saying we  

need accelerated investments. The investments that 
are crucial for many countries are investments  

in adaptation, not simply in mitigation, and 
I know that this is a key focus for Egypt,  

so can you talk about that a little bit 
and link it also to the social side? 
 
 

Deputy minister, I'm not getting a translation. 
Are others in the room getting a translation?  

No. I'm going to come back to 
you. Maybe our translator ... 
 

I will speak in English. In Egypt, we organise by 
the end of this year, COP27, and Sharm El-Sheikh  

in Egypt, and the main target and title of 
COP27 will be moving from negotiation to the  

implementation. So, we need to, but all 
targets and all objectives of Glasgow and all  

COPs, in previous COPs to be implemented in 
the near future. And also, all of you know  

that Egypt will organise this COP on behalf 
of African continent. The African continent  

is more vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change, so we need to be balanced between  

mitigation and adaptation. So if we look at 
Al-Biggs of raising the renewable energy or  

implementing the clean energy in the African 
continent especially in Egypt, we need to be  

more supportive from developed countries. One 
of them may be financing. As I mentioned before,  

Egypt decided to exclude and eliminate coal 
power plants from our strategy by 2035.  

Can you protect that they - can you predict the 
amount of power, coal power plant is around 23  

gigawatt from coal. If we replace this amount 
of coal power plant to be replaced by renewable  

energy, we need around 46 gigawatts of 
rectangle energy. The amount of financing  

needed for that, around $50 billion to invest in 
this amount of renewable energy by 2035. We need  

more collaboration between north and south to 
support African continent and African countries  

for two pillars, and two paths. One with 
the adaptation of the climate change,  

and also to support the African continent and 
African ones to implement and to construct more  

and more from renewable energy capacities. We need 
for that capacity-building, financing, because,  

if we add more and more from renewable energy, 
the stability of the grid will be challenged. So  

we need capacity of building. We need technology 
transfer, interconnection with the Europe grid,  

and so on. So the challenge is big, but 
with with collaboration and co-operation,  

we can face these challenges in the future. 
N-thank you so much, and thank you also for  

your flexibility. The translator apologised. She 
was away from the microphone, I think. We now ask,  

we have five minutes left, I hear. Minister 
Benali and Minister Aliyu, what are you doing  

to take your people along on this energy 
transition? We heard our young speakers talking  

about the crucial impact also for young people. 
Talk that a little bit if you would, please. 
 

Thank you for this question. I think it is 
a people-centric question is essential. We  

heard it at the COP in Glasgow, and we are 
hearing it today in Berlin. I think that  

is something that Siemens was saying, but when 
they talk about societal challenge, we need to  

put a price-tag on all this. It is unbearable, 
but we need to put a price-tag. So when I say  

that if you want us to flood the market with two 
dollars hydrogen and the equivalent of ammonia,  

we can do that. Our. The one-stop-shop will 
give you certificates of origin for tradeable  

certificates for green hydrogen, access to 
information on investment opportunities,  

stable regulatory framework, et cetera. We are 
already connected to Europe. Morocco already  

has a couple of electricity lines to Spain, we 
are working on a third one, we are also working  

on an interconnection with Portugal, potentially 
with the UK, and we also have a pipeline, a gas  

pipeline between Morocco and Spain. We are already 
there in terms of connectivity. What it means now  

is that we need to put a price on all this, a 
price - sorry, on the negative externalities,  

and a cost on those negative externalities, 
and hopefully some incentive, incentives on  

a positive externalities for those who are 
able to accompany in this energy transition.  

We like to do it discreetly, efficiently, 
but again, I'm launching, I'm hearing really  

putting a call for let's stop using - start to put 
some numbers, it will help the financial community  

speak the same language as the policymakers, and 
it will enable us to push through those projects  

for the benefits of the people within Europe, 
and within the countries that are the outskirts  

of Europe who are playing a leading role in this 
energy transition. So we really want to utilise  

the underutilised, or non-utilised infrastructure 
we already had that was built in the 20th century  

to - but that comes with a cost as well. We have 
to internalise those costs. And I will finish with  

the final word on leap-frogging, we are always 
asked to leap-frog to green hydrogen and green  

ammonia - definitely. What we are trying to 
do is to rebuild our infrastructure, be it  

electricity systems, gas infrastructure, 
to enable them to be future-proofed for  

hydrogen, and ammonia for the future. Thank you. 
Thank you very much. Minister Aliyu, please? 
 

Thank you, moderator. Yes, you've asked what 
are we doing in our individual countries?  

Yes, we have all been doing our own bits. But 
the approach should be well connected like this,  

and what are we doing collectively? Countries have 
their own challenges peculiar to where they are,  

so with the coordinated global action, 
based on the Paris Accord, and COP26,  

it is urgent now to do the renewable way 
more than ever before. However - however,  

we must not forget the fact that  

countries differ in the emission of the 
carbon in the atmosphere. The richer countries  

emit more of the carbon, and they have enjoyed 
the benefit of that for over two centuries. Jo so,  

for instance, my country, the emissions 
are just very infinitesimal, very small  

compared to the other countries' per capita 
emission. So I think the rich countries should  

look at the smaller countries in terms 
of support to make them leap-frog,  

as the word was used, in the present 
situation, because most of these countries  

have a lot of challenges - insecurity, hunger, 
and so many things like this. So, it is only when  

you're out of this situation that you give more 
attention to other things like that. More so, the  

fossil fuels that we are trying to ... is a source 
of income for some of these countries, and they  

are a source of energy. For instance, my country, 
80% of our generation comes from that. Only  

20% comes from renewables. Which we have a vision 
now to increase to 30% renewables by 2030. And  

the pathway that we have developed 
towards the 2060 Net Zero will require  

over 400 million dollars. Where will this come 
from if we don't get support from multi-laterals,  

from other countries? This is the way I want us 
to approach this. The richer countries should  

look upon the smaller countries in terms of 
finances and support, loans based on ... and  

things like that to carry everybody along. 
Thank you very much. That is a very important  

note to end on. We did, in fact, hear from the 
German Foreign Minister earlier saying there can  

be no national path in the Enengiewende in the 
energy transition, it can only be accomplished  

internationally, globally, with co-operation, and 
certainly I know that will be a topic in sharp  

sharp also later on this year. So many, many 
thanks to all of you for being part of this panel.  

Thank you so much, Commissioner, Simson for being 
with us from Brussels. We very much appreciate  

your joining us remotely, and thank you for 
your very strong messages that we will take  

with us into our further discussions. Here at BETD 
2022. Let's give them a warm round of applause.


