Hello and welcome back to the studio session. 
I am joined by Eamon Ryan, one of the  

houses of the Irish legislature. As Melinda just 
mentioned, he's the Minister of Environment,  

Climate and Communications and 
Minister for Transport since 2014.  

He's been head of the Green Party in Ireland 
since May of 2011. Welcome, Eamon Ryan. 
 

Thank you very much. Thrilled to be here. 
What a pleasure it is to have you. Ireland  

took over the North Seas Energy Corporation 
this year. I wonder, speaking in that capacity,  

if you can give us a broad perspective of 
the key role of offshore energy production  

in driving European climate goals. 
Okay. North Sea's Energy Corporation started  

about ten years ago. The seas is the important 
word, the North Sea, the Celtic Sea, going into  

the Atlantic. That's our largest renewable source 
in this part of Europe. If we can tap into that,  

that's one of the ways we can switch off our 
dependency on Russian oil, coal, and gas. The idea  

is to think of it as a supergrid. To design it 
from the top?down, thinking how do we really  

design this in a way that's lowest cost, best for 
the environment, and best for local communities? 
 

And I see it, this is the peace project of our 
time. This is the answer to the Putin government.  

That we don't need that alternative. 
We have our own power here.  

We've already started. A lot of countries are 
already building offshore winds out in the seas.  

We've learned a lot. The price has come down a 
lot in the last five to six years. It's economic.  

The real key thing is getting the grid. So how 
you bring the power ashore. How you reduce the  

amount of times you have to come ashore. How 
you share and trade power in a clever way so  

you can use the interconnection between countries 
as a way of picking up the wind power on the way.  

So this cooperation is now going to accelerate. 
Everything is in response to this crisis. 
 

What we're gonna have to do is work collectively. 
How we design where we get the wind from.  

Optimising the environment. How we design the grid 
to move that around and how we share it and how  

we agree to trade it and share it. And lastly, 
I think probably the most urgent thing we need  

to do in their cooperation, the same thing will be 
happening in the Baltic and the Mediterranean, but  

we also have to look at how do we co?ordinate how 
we get shipping for this? How we get the turbines  

built. It is a wartime situation where we have to 
build at scale and at speed. And I think it's a  

collaboration on that now is what the North Seas 
Energy Ministers are going to work on and do. 
 

So how do we do that? How can we 
make this coordinated? How can we  

take advantage of offshore energy 
resources in a coordinated way? 
 

Well, I think firstly, I think it is working with 
the industry. As I've said, they've learned a lot  

in the last five to ten years as to how to do it, 
but it's a precarious industry. For a lot of them,  

the margin is very tight. The cost of steel is 
very high. The planning and the permitting system  

is really uncertain. Takes often ten years to get 
a project if you're lucky, from start to finish.  

So one of the things we need to do is reduce 
some of those risks. Reduce some of that cost.  

Working collaboratively so that actually we can 
say to those companies, we know you're going  

to need an order of this amount, huge amount of 
production. And can we manage that in a way over  

the next decade to two decades, in an organised, 
steady stream way where some of the risks are  

taken out, where some of the costs come down? 
The second thing I think critically we need to do.  

It's also about hydrogen and ammonia. Not just how 
do we move electricity, but how do we convert some  

of that power to hydrogen or green hydrogen 
or ammonia and ship that between different  

countries? So it's not just about the electricity 
power system. It's also about the fuel system.  

New hydrogen?fueled system. We have just come 
from a meeting with the German government in  

terms of can we sit down and agree how we would 
do this? As they're doing with various other  

countries. So it's that level of cooperation. 
And the third thing, the key thing on this,  

if this ?? if this is a new supergrid, if we're 
really thinking about the energy system of the  

future, it has to be hyperefficient. And a 
lot of this depends on ?? it's like a dance.  

It's a dance between variable supply and 
variable demand. That's the industrial  

revolution of our time. It involves digital 
technologies as well as clean air technologies.  

Critical to it is public trust. Because what we 
will need to do is develop systems where we're  

switching things on and off, depending on where 
the wind is or how strong it is at any one time.  

And even as the weather systems come 
across Europe, starting in the Atlantic,  

working its way over the UK into the North 
Sea, over in the Baltic, that we ship demand  

and balance a managed demand as we follow 
the weather system across the continent. 
 

I know that sounds science fiction. That 
sounds really big and bold. But that's  

what's gonna happen because that is the better 
energy system. That's the secure energy system.  

That's this new balancing system which we places 
the expensive, insecure, and dirty fossil fuels. 
 

It does sound big. It does sound bold. It 
is going to take a lot of public support.  

My last question to you today would be, what 
might get in our way? What's gonna be the  

biggest thing that stays between us and success? 
I think public support is the key issue. Like we  

all know, in countries across Europe, 
we haven't been able to build grids  

across our countries. We haven't ?? it's not 
been easy getting permitting for any project.  

If we're to make the planning system quicker, 
which is one of the key obstacles. If we're to get  

some of the measures to really push 
and develop the industries here,  

we need public support. And that comes down to ?? 
we were chatting earlier on about telling storeys.  

This is the key storey we have to tell. That 
this belongs to us. We, the people. This has  

an advantage in that we're relying on our local 
power supply. We've seen the disadvantage on being  

dependent on somewhere else. This is our power. 
This has to be shared in a way that does ?? is  

part of a just transition. It has to be where we 
get community benefit and community involvement. 
 

And we ought to tell this storey in a way that's 
not just about megawatts and grid systems,  

but it's speaking to the heart, that this is the 
peace project of our time. This is what gives  

our children and their children a secure, 
stable future. Not just in terms of energy,  

but also in climate. This is one of the big 
projects that we can do to stop the world burning.  

And to tell that, not in the way we're pointing 
at people and telling them what to do or putting  

shame or guilt on them, but raising their 
hearts with the sense of hope and expectation  

that there is an alternative, that it's more 
socially progressive. It supports democratic  

systems as Robert Habeck said earlier. 
It gives us energy. Heats our homes.
 

Drives our cars and electric bikes. 
Allows our industry to flourish.  

It's that storey we have to tell. It's a big 
storey but we shouldn't be afraid to go big  

because that's what we're gonna have to 
do to replace all those fossil fuels. 
 

Thank you so much, Eamon Ryan. It's true, 
it's a big storey but the it's the right  

storey to be telling. Thank you so much 
for joining us here in our studio session.


