Thank you so much for inviting me, and thank
you for the amazing inspirational speeches

we just heard.

If you understand any English, take off the
earphones, because I speak way too fast, and

the poor interpret are going to have a hard
time!

Make their life easier!

We seem to keep going from crisis to crisis
to crisis - financial crisis, climate crisis,

health crisis, geopolitical crisis.

What I want to argue is that to do what this
conference is talking about - which is to

go from ambition to action - we need to stop
being reactive.

We need a proactive way to solve our problems.

Even the way that policy - and I'm an economist
who looks at government policy - is designed

is, by definition, reactive, because it's
all about fixing market failures.

And I think a really good first starting point
to do what this conference is talking about

from ambition to action is actually to ask
ourselves: what is a new framing?

What is a new design to actually take that
seriously?

And how do we, using the sexy word out there
"walk the talk" of stakeholder value?

We need to produce and distribute differently,
which means doing it through a value-driven

approach.

What does it mean to take seriously concepts
of the common good?

The common good is a very, very strong word.

Pope Francis actually talks about it all the
time, and in economics, we talk about public

goods, but if you look in the text books about
public goods, it's just kind of correcting

for something that the private sector is not
doing.

There is no real common good approach as an
objective.

So, instead of just correcting and fixing
market failures, and constantly picking up

the mess, literally, of crisis after crisis,
I think this conference needs to be a call

to action for change.

And of course that would have, you know, been
just as strong of a call had this - had Putin's

war also not happened.

We were already under very, very bad - we
were already on a very, very bad path.

The financial crisis, many countries are still
trying get out of it.

The climate crisis, as Greta Thunberg reminds
us, we are blah, blah, blahing.

Europe subsidised fossil fuels companies with
56 billion in subsidies.

2020, of the COVID-19 recovering funds, gone
to energy companies globally, in the G20 countries

- something like 52% of that went to fossil
fuel projects.

That is hardly doing what the IPCC has told
us to do, which is get moving quickly because

we have about eight years left until we have
an irreversible climate emergency.

This is of course why again when Greta says
when your house is on fire?

Do you sit there debate and go?

You get out fast.

We were not moving at pace.

To move at pace, we also have to take care
slowly to think about why we have done things

so wrongly.

And what we need to change within our business
governance - so corporate governance structures

- but also policy governance, the governance
of the state, which is actually very inertial,

not agile, not flexible, and constantly in
a fixing mode.

And, you know, to actually have a green transition,
a proper green revolution, we need to ourselves

literally what it means for producing differently,
for innovating differently.

Innovation isn't always good - it depends
how we govern that innovation process.

We see this of course today with the big tech
problems in terms of issues around privacy,

and so on.

It is not enough to fund digital technology,
or even the internet, if we don't think about

how to govern it for the common good.

And I think what is really inspiring, Minister
Habeck, is the title of your ministry: economic

affairs and climate.

That is so important.

These are not trade-offs.

If we actually innovate, invest, and collaborate
differently, towards climate action, or, to

be honest, towards all of the sustainable
development goals, all 17 of them, we just

had the UN Secretary General speak, there
is 169 targets beneath him that all require

innovation, technological, organisational,
social innovation.

If we do that through a collaborative approach,
if we do that even using the full capacity

of our industrial strategies, our innovation
policies, our procurement budgets, right - something

like 40% of every government's budget is just
on buying stuff, procuring green services,

green products, and really using all the levers
that governments have - grants, loans, procurement,

bailouts - to fuel bottom-up experimentation
towards the social, environmental goals.

That can create economic growth.

But only if we have the investment lens, and
that is why it is important to go from ambition

to action through an investment pathway, collaboratively,
through public, private, third sector civil

organisations working together in a different
way.

You know what?

We're not doing this.

Let me quickly remind you why this call for
action is important.

First of all, finance: the financial sector
continues to mainly finance itself.

Something like 80% of the finance that was
created after the financial back to finance,

insurance, and real estate.

It didn't really land on the real economy.

It wasn't teem the money creation - the money
creation did not happen side by side with

real kind of fiscal stimulus packages that
created new opportunities in the real economy

for that money to land somewhere real.

Let alone the green direction of that green
economy.

And, in fact, the latest findings using the
greenness of stimulus index, the GSI, shows

that only 20% of investment, 4.8 trillion
... announced during the COVID-19 pandemic,

so announced in July 2021, only 28% of that
is going into green sectors, with only 1.8

trillion, so only 10.6% having any sort of
net positive impact on the environment and

green sectors.

This is called wasting a crisis.

The trillions that are coming out of the wood
work after we were told just three or four

years ago there was no money, the trillions
need to be actually directed towards improving

our economy, towards making it more sustainable
and inclusive.

In theory, that is what Build Back Better,
build Forwards Better, should mean.

We're not doing that.

Second, business, corporate governs - it matters.

There are different ways to do it.

In fact, in Germany, you have, like much of
northern Europe, been implementing, not in

a perfect way, but this concept of stakeholder
value, right?

You actually have trade union representatives
on the boards, for example, of your companies.

But globally, we have is a huge extraction
machine going on.

Something like four trillion dollars, that
is 12 zeros, just to remind us all, have been

used to buy back shares by large corporate
500 companies, to buy back shares, to boost

share prices, stock options, and executive
pay.

That's a lack of reinvestment back into the
economy.

Of course that also hurts, for example, people
who work in companies.

Labour.

Right?

Labour share of global income - GDP can be
broken down in different way, including the

share of different parts - the labour share
it at the lowest it's been in modern capitalist

history.

That lack of reinvestment back into the economy,
and human capital in training, in research

and development, in this large chunk that
is being extracted for what we might call

financialised purposes, we need to talk about
that.

There are other ways that extraction occurs
as well - intellectual property rights, something

I would love to speak more with my German
colleagues.

Intellectual property rights, patents, are
fine, as long as they're not abused, but often

we have patents, IPR, that is true upstream,
so actually privatising the tools for research,

and we need lots of research for the green
transition, but also for our healthcare systems,

to upstream too wide, often used for strategic
reasons, and too strong - hard to license.

How do we actually govern an innovation system
or intellectual property rights for the common

good?

Well, that means limiting that extractive
power, and, Minister Habeck, you said the

sun is a common good.

Well, so is water.

We managed to do a lot of problems with water.

I'm going tobacco chairing with the World
Trade Organisation and Beyond Water.

Water is a common good.

We have managed to turn it into a private
good, and we are hardly sharing it globally.

So the Sun, let's be careful!

It's not just because we have a renewable
energy strategy that it will be good enough.

We've also managed to privatise genes - genes!

Anyway, the other huge problem, besides finance
business, is government, I already mentioned

before, we have this boring framing for what
government should be, right?

If it is just fixing market failures, it will
always be too little too late.

It will often not have the capacity, the dynamic
capabilities within public organisations in

order to govern really difficult challenges,
whether they be financial crises, climate

crises, health crises, geopolitical crises.

This massive outsourcing of government capacity,
for example, to consulting companies, whether

it is McKenzie, PwC, it is not necessarily
the consulting companies' fault, it's the

question: why do we not understand public
sector organisations also as Valko creating?

Why are they just fixing?

If they are co-creating, if they have to govern
these really difficult processes, what are

the skills that are required inside?

What is the subject area spurt tease that
is required inside?

And what is the knowledge about how to work
with the private sector? What are the right

terms of reference and good deals?

So I just want to end with a call for proper
action around these issues, and I recently

wrote a book called The Mission Economy - A
Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism, A Moonshot

Approach.

51 years ago.

We went to the moon.

It was hard.

Kennedy said we're going to do it because
it is hard, not easy.

Think of all the policy speak today.

It's about facilitating, making things easier.

Taking on the uncertainty, taking on the difficulty,
admitting that you actually require risk-taking,

experimentation, sandboxing, testing, policies,
that is the very important first step.

The second thing is the moon landing was not
just public sector.

It was guided by public institutions - NASA
especially - but it required huge amounts

of efforts by many, many different sectors
- nutrition, electronics, materials, the software

sector.

And, also, that collaboration which created
so many spillovers - baby formula, home insulation,

camera phones, the software industry, basically,
was a spillover - didn't just happen.

They didn't just say, "Let's play together
and collaborate", it was designed into the

system.

The first thing they did was actually change
how procurement was done.

It was away from a cost-plus technique towards
fixed-price, like a challenge, yes?

Targets?

But then very open on the how.

They also within NASA - this is so interesting,
the guy who was running procurement said,

"We, within our public organisation need to
be smart.

We want to know who to work with - we won't
know who to work with if we don't have the

capabilities."

He warned back then if we don't do that, if
we become dumb won our public institutions

with we will get captured brochuremanship.

They didn't have PowerPoint back then!

They said this would involve risk taking from
different actors so let's not make this a

gambling casino.

So many of these points are incredibly important
for what we are trying to do here: redesigning

policy with really bold targets, starting
with the sustainability development goals

but turning them into really concrete missions
- plastic-free ocean, carbon-neutral cities,

getting every single sector involved instead
of having these static lists of sectors in

a kind of top sector industrial strategy approach.

Redesigning all the instruments, procurement,
bailouts,ants, loans, to really foster that

bottom-up experimentation, and, on that, by
the way, some countries are leading.

I found it really interesting that in Germany,
the loan that was provided to the steel sector

by the KFW was conditional, the public bank
here, on steel lowering its material content

to repurpose, reduce, reuse recycle technology
and today is along with Sweden one of the

greenest sectors in the world.

Not because they went to Davos talk about
purpose, but because they had to to get one

penny.

Same thing like the French recovery fund,
to get any money from the government during

the Covid recovery period, Air France, had
to commit to lowering their carbon emissions.

Doing that in such a way that remains open
on the how is really important, really to

kind of stimulate that bottom-up innovation,
but simply handing out money, subsidies, guarantees,

or bailouts without that kind of conditionality
is again a waste of a crisis.

We need to be really redesigning the policies,
but also reviving a true social contract in

such a way that we have symbiotic mutualistic
public-private partnerships, and less of the

kind of parasitic time that unfortunately
we've seen.

Let me finish on that, and thank you again
for your wonderful speeches, for the invitation,

but we really need to think of this as a way
to redesign our capitalist system.

There are different ways to do it.

Everything we are currently experiencing which
is problematic, including vaccine apart tide,

where 80% of the vaccines are being hoarded
by 10% of countries.

There is nothing inevitable in that, that
is an outcome of decisions we're making and

also the relational situations we have between
public and private.

We can and must reinvent it.

Thank you very much.


