I would like to thank Svenja Schulze 
for her inspiring words this morning.  

Of course, it is a great pleasure for me to be 
at the 8th Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.  

My warmest thanks to the German government 
for convening this conference, and also to  

Minister Schulze for her support at COP26 
and the great leadership she has shown  

in this area. I wish of course that we were 
meeting today in brighter circumstances. This is  

indeed a dark time for Europe and for the world. 
Ukrainian friends and colleagues are fighting on  

the streets to defend their homeland from Russian 
aggression. And, as Minister Schulze has said,  

this has been a remarkable turning 
point, a change, in world affairs.  

Russia's invasion of Ukraine has highlight ed in 
very stark terms the need for European countries  

to accelerate the energy transition, and 
to wean themselves off Russian oil and gas.  

In the UK, we get only a small 
proportion of our supply from Russia,  

but in the context of Vladimir Putin's aggression,  

even that small fraction is too much. So I was 
very pleased to announce only a few weeks ago  

that we will phase out Russian oil and look at 
ways to reduce the amount of gas we use generally.  

The EU, our friends in the EU, are also taking 
steps to end dependence on Russian hydrocarbons.  

In the UK, we are stepping up plans for a 
home-grown energy system, generating cheaper,  

cleaner energy by expanding renewables, and by 
looking at nuclear, while we use the resources of  

the North Sea to manage the transition. Our energy 
security strategy, which we will set out shortly,  

will point the way in showing how 
exactly we mean to do this. Of course,  

we all need to accelerate the shift away from 
fossil fuels. That is for our energy security,  

and also, let's not forget this, to combat climate 
change. At COP26, countries agreed to phase down  

their use of coal to keep 1.5 degrees alive. As we 
all know here, words are not enough. Governments  

must revisit their 2030 targets. We must deliver 
policies at pace, and double the finance available  

for adaptation. It has been nearly six months 
since the launch of our own government's,  

the UK government's, Net Zero strategy, and it 
was labelled by the Climate Change Committee  

as arguably the world's most comprehensive Net 
Zero plan. We've already mobilised 12 million of  

government funding to support new green tech 
but investment from the private sector has  

quickly followed. We will continue to 
ramp up renewables; we will continue  

to invest in hydrogen production which 
represents a shared priority for the UK,  

but also, as Svenja suggested, for our 
friends in Germany, and other global partners.  

Offshore wind will continue to be a major 
contributor to the clean energy mix, particularly  

for the UK, and many of our European neighbours 
with access to the North Sea. The interconnect  

will bring together the UK and German electricity 
market, and allow the UK's growing wind power  

generation to play a role in the decarbonisation 
and security of both energy sectors in the UK  

and also in Germany. We managed, I think, 
at COP26 to launch to Steel breakthrough,  

and I'm looking forward in terms of decarbonising 
steel to work closely with Germany and others  

to accelerate this agenda. The sort of 
transformation that we are looking to achieve  

can only be possible - and this cannot be 
stressed enough - it's only possible through  

international collaboration. In Glasgow, through 
campaigning on coal, cars, cash, and trees, we  

generated new momentum to drive climate ambition 
in key sectors of our economies across the world.  

We've established the energy and zero-emissions 
vehicles, transition councils, and the just energy  

transition partnership with South Africa. Ladies 
and gentlemen, in the wake of COP26, we need to  

turn our ambition frequently stated into action. 
The green industrial revolution will help us to  

reach Net Zero, secure energy independence, and 
create better jobs and lives for our citizens.  

We must approach these goals in a spirit of 
collaboration and partnership, but also with a  

laser-like focus, and a renewed sense of urgency. 
Thank you all very much this morning. Thank you.


