Hello, and welcome to this very first Europasaal 
plenary session. Today we're taking a look at  

drivers for a just and social energy transition. 
Now when addressing the climate crisis,  

it's important to design measures in a manner 
that's inclusive and socially equitable. The  

main question I'll be looking at with my panelists 
today is what are the steps necessary to ensure  

that the shift towards a low-carbon energy world 
is organized in a socially inclusive and just  

manner. I would like to now introduce the guests 
on the panel starting on the left of your screen.  

Parviz Shabazov, the Minister 
of Energy for Azerbaijan, as the  

Azerbaijan potentiary you held that position 
until 2016. Welcome and thanks for joining us.  

Leonore Gewessler, Federal Minister for Climate 
Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation  

and Technology of Austria. Also a scientist and 
an environmental activist. She was previously  

the executive director of the environmental 
organization Global 2000 from 2014 to 2019.  

Welcome, your excellency. Skrekas, the Minister 
of Environment & Energy for Greece. And you have  

been with the party since twelve. Thank you very 
much. And Constantin Borosan, State Secretary  

for Energy, Ministry of Infrastructure & Regional 
Development of mol doe have. And you have worked  

on projects on the Moldovan energy secretary.
And have joining us virtually,  

Lucia Bakulumpagi-Wamala, CEO & Founder for 
Bakulu Power who designs systems. Welcome.  

And Barbara Pompili, Minister of the Ecological 
Transition for France since 2020. And previously  

Secretary of State for Biodiversity, welcome.
Thank you so much for join me today. I know the  

time is limited. Right into the questions. 
For the first round of questions, I'll ask  

you to keep your responses to 2 minutes. And the 
first question is for the ministers on the panel.  

Minister Gewessler, Pompili and Skrekas. 
You are with your European member states.  

Can you to be how you work within the European 
framework to ensure that the transition to net  

zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 will be 
achieved while advancing the socio-economic  

well being of all citizens. I would like to 
start with Minister Gewessler of Austria.
 

Thanks a lot. What an honor to give the 
first input. I'll start on a meta level.  

I think in the European Union, and 
reflected in the question you posed.  

One question that make us strong in the transition 
is we talk about the transition. It's no longer  

about incremental changes, but we talk about 
a step change and the implementation in the  

energy transition. The second point is we do 
it on a set of -- on a common denominator.  

That we want to do it in a transparent and open 
and accountable way, in a socially just way,  

in an inclusive way. And enables us all to inject 
these pockets of change into the system that  

we need to really advance towards a new way of 
producing, consuming energy based on renewables.
 

And so, I think with these two factors, the basic 
-- the basic anchor in terms of the Green Deal, in  

terms of transition and the way we do things, this 
really enables us to create a virtual spiral to  

not only focus on the lowest common denominator. 
I think that's really one of the key things to  

take away from -- that I take away now from my two 
years of experience in the council as a Minister.  

Briefly, three examples how we tried to 
implement this, I'll be very brief, I know.  

On how we implement this in Austria. The one 
thing is energy transition. We focus a lot on  

energy communities. So, we get to framework from 
the European Union. We stretched it to the max  

in Austria to implement it really in a very open 
and transparent way because it brings new actors  

in the system. It allows for participation 
in the energy transition for citizens.
 

We focus on policy design on social justice. 
For example, by enabling 100% funding for  

low-income households in changing their heating 
systems. And the carbon pricing that we now  

introduce as of July this year. All of the income 
is channeled back to consumers on a per capita  

bonus, the climate bonus that works. Especially 
towards low-income households because they consume  

less CO2. So, it's about the way we do things, 
about the goal we have, but also about the policy  

design that we use at the European level and at 
the national level. And I think this enables us  

to go further. And if the current situation 
teaches us one thing, then that's exactly  

what we need to do. We need to advance our 
ambition and be even more coherent and fast  

in the implementation of the energy transition.
Absolutely. And I'm glad we took the time. Those  

are three fantastic measures. I'll ask 
now Minister Skrekas of Greece. It's on.
 

It's okay. Now it's okay. First of all, 
thank you for the invitation. Let me say that  

the question is perhaps exactly the task that all 
European governments have undertaken regarding the  

European common vision which is to achieve 
carbon neutrality by 2050. And, of course,  

this is not an easy task at all. I mean, on the 
one hand, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,  

and on the other hand to make sure that nobody 
will be left behind. Nobody will be excluded.  

And why I say this? Because there must be huge 
investments. Huge investments in resources.  

Large investments in had the upgrading of 
the electricity grid, in building storage  

systems so that to penetrate -- to increase the 
penetration of renewables into our energy mix. So,  

all this, of course, must be recovered. All 
this investment is going to be recovered.  

Who is going to pay in the medium term in the 
transition period? Of course, the consumers.
 

We have to make sure that during this period, 
the most vulnerable are not going to be excluded.  

That is why currently Europe provides all elements 
in order to really achieve a just transition. So,  

provides the financing tools, the financial tools. 
So, for example, the resiliency recovery fund,  

we utilize more than 5 billion Euro from 
the resiliency fund in Greece in order to  

promote energy efficiency in households and in 
businesses. Also, to subsidize to support the  

construction and the building, the 
establishment of storage facilities  

by subsidizing the cap so the cap will 
be lower to the consumers finally.
 

Also, Europe, apart from the financial tools, 
provides also the regulation. A very clear  

and very open and transparent regulation. 
Very well-designed. In order to  

achieve this -- this transition with the best 
cost effective way. Which is very important. So,  

in Greece, of course, we fully share and we 
promote the common European vision of achieving  

the carbon neutrality by 2050. We are expanding 
the interconnections with neighboring countries.  

We are promoting energy communities. Especially 
in order to reduce the cost to the most vulnerable  

households. But also to support some specific 
sectors of the economy, like the primary sector  

agriculture and the second dare section.
Thank you very much. Minister Pompili of France,  

I would like to ask the same question. We have 
a lot to get through. We don't have enough time.  

Please limit your responses to 
2 minutes. Minister Pompili.
 

Thank you. And thank you for inviting me today. 
It's nice to be with you. This is crucial for  

us. And I totally agree with what Kostas 
said. Working within the European framework  

gives us the best chance to achieve this goal. The 
EU has pledged to reduce its carbon emission by  

55 by 2030 and to reach carbon neutrality by 
2050. These targets are extremely ambitious and  

will require bold measures. And as President of 
the European Environment & Energy councils, I want  

to push forward and find the common ground by the 
55 package by the end of the French presidency.  

And this ambitious legislative package 
paved the way to 2030. And organizes the  

decarbonization of the key sector of the economy. 
And there are many reasons why the EU Green Deal  

is the best framework to reach these goals.
First, efficiency. The EU is a leading continent  

for carbon pricing. And thanks to the strength 
of the European carbon market with the emissions  

of industry and power production sectors have 
been reduced significantly since 2005. With the  

fit for 55, the package will be strengthened and 
extending to new sectors. The Council has agreed  

on the creation of a carbon mechanism which 
will incentivize our trade partners to align  

their climate policies with the EU.
Second, level playing field across member states.  

The energy transition will require huge additional 
investment by 2030 to spur economic activity  

and innovation. And, for instance, the EU is 
leading the transition towards electric vehicles  

thanks to ambitious policies such as the CO2 
emissions. And third and last, in line with  

Leonore Gewessler and Kostas said, the EU is the 
most advanced form of international cooperation  

to provide solidarity across member states. 
Workers and taxpayers. For instance, the Just  

Transition Fund targets the regions which are the 
most affected and helps workers and businesses to  

reallocate their resources toward most sustainable 
activities. It's very important, I repeat,  

not to leave anyone behind. Thank you.
Absolutely. We don't want to leave anyone  

behind. Now to a guest joining us live, Minister 
Shabazov of Azerbaijan your country has potential,  

but you are looking at export of fossil fuels. 
What are you going to reduce the dependency on oil  

and gas in response those that need the industry?
First of all, thank you for the invitation.  

I have to mention that, you know, 
Azerbaijan for the historical reasons  

has been the hydrocarbons rich country. 
Another important element was that Azerbaijan  

has been striving also to provide for each -- 
for its own energy security and sustainability  

of the energy sectors. That's why the oil and 
gas sector has been developing very effectively  

and rapidly in the recent years. And we were 
providing for the energy security. Not only for  

Azerbaijan, but also for its neighbors and 
its partners. And also made significant  

contribution into the energy security of Europe.
At the same time, we have to understand that  

without provided energy security, we cannot start 
the processes of decarbonization. And now when  

we have already provided for the necessary level 
of the energy security at the national level, we  

have started to embark on the development of the 
renewable sources of energy in Azerbaijan. And it  

has become already one of the priorities of the 
social economic development in our country. And,  

of course, we see the development of renewable 
sources of energy as one of the important elements  

for the economic development in our country.
At the same time, I have to mention that we  

have the great plans for the development of 
the renewable source of energy on the liberated  

territories of Azerbaijan. And we in a 
parallel have declared the 30% of the  

share in the generation capacities of our country 
for the renewable sources of energy by 2030. And  

we have enormous, the capacities of 
the renewable sources of energy and  

concretely the wind energy in the Azerbaijan 
sector of the Caspian Sea which actually  

is coming to the focus of our government and we 
would like to embark on the development of this.
 

And I would love to come back to this 
a little bit later for another question  

that I'll be asking of you. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Shabazov. They are helping them  

cope with high energy prices. What measures have 
you taken so far when it comes to this? And what  

role does international cooperation play?
>> Thank you, first of all, for inviting  

us and having the opportunity to 
participate in such an inspiring  

event. For the first time participate in this 
Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue. And please  

apologize from his excellency, deputy 
prime minister and the prime minister for  

not being able to participate at 
the event for objective reasons.
 

Back to your question. Moldova has taken a list 
of actions to support consumers facing -- facing  

prices spikes in last months we saw. And 
immediately when government was appointed,  

was taken measures to increase the 
minimum amount of pensions to more than  

10% of population which benefits 
from that social protection.  

Then government has taken the decision to 
increase the minimum wage in the real sector.  

This also contributed to increased incomes of 
population of consumers to pay their bills.
 

Then, of course, more targeted measures were taken 
when -- when Paris were increased. And this is  

support directly into deal. And we discuss here 
about consumers which have a consumption until  

a certain level of energy, for instance, in the 
case of gas. So, consumers reach -- we consume not  

more than 150 cubic meters of gas benefit from 
a compensation which the government covers.  

And also, those consumers connected to this also 
benefit from compensation directly into the bill.
 

This is one of the measures 
what government taken.
 

I would love to come back to this later. I want 
to make sure we have time for all of our guests  

to introduce themselves. I would now like to turn 
to our next digital guest, Ms. Bakulumpagi-Wamala.  

I would like to let Cara know I have 
an issue with my iPad right now.  

But turn to Miss Bakulumpagi-Wamala 
who can give her opening statements.
 

Are you okay?
Please, go ahead.
 

Yes, is there a question directed towards me.
Definitely, there's a question, the power on  

my iPad has gone out and I'm going to ask Cara up 
on stage. And I will be able to direct a question  

to you. Thanks so much for your patience. 
Thanks so much, Cara. Thank you so much.
 

All right. We're there. Now, based on 
your experience in your native Uganda,  

how do you go about informing local 
communities with the energy projects  

were implementing and how were your ideas met?
Yeah. Absolutely. I also want to first thank you  

for inviting me. It's really very humbling to 
be on stage -- virtually -- with all of these  

esteemed Ministers. With us at Bakulu Power, we 
follow the regulatory frame set by the government.  

The first step when you're introducing an 
energy product is to go to the community.  

So, we have a hierarchy of local leaders. 
We liaise mostly with the sub-county chief  

and the county minister. Step one was to get 
in touch and let them know our intentions to  

electrify their communities. And we held public 
open community meetings. And we let everybody  

have a chance to get on the microphone 
and speak. We were met very positively.
 

One thing that came up which kind of shocked 
me at first during one of our earlier meetings  

was a local resident immediately said, well, 
don't come here and steal all of our women.  

And I found it a very odd comment. But the 
further I got in the development process,  

I actually began to understand what he was saying. 
When you have people -- I mean, I'm Ugandan, yes.  

You can hear my accent. I was raised in the West. 
When you have people coming from "Abroad" and  

really our team is everyone -- except for me -- 
is born and bred in Uganda. But even when you come  

from the city of Kampala and working in a deep 
rural area, there is a disparity between income.
 

So, you have sometimes in these deep rural 
community projects, sometimes people do  

get taken advantage of. So, it does actually 
cause marital issues sometimes when there's the  

better-off men from the city coming and working in 
deep rural communities. So, that was one comment  

that really stood out to me and just showed the 
importance of really working with the community  

to let them know that we're not here to come and 
take over anything. We're here to work together.
 

Great. Thank you so much. I would like to 
now come to our second round of questions.  

And to my panelists, again, I would 
like to ask you to keep your answers  

to the limited time amount because I want to make 
sure we have the chance. And round two, Minister  

Skrekas. Your government put the emphasis on the 
competitiveness of regions with delignification  

of the energy sector. Can you name one or two best 
practices that have emerged from this initiative.
 

First let me say that in September 2019, our 
prime minister announced from the United Nations  

Conference in New York that we are going to 
phase out all of our lignite power plants  

by 2028. That was a very wise decision. 
Taking into account that not only the  

use of lignite in coal in the environment. 
But also the financial implications.  

Especially if you add the carbon tax that 
we have initiated here in Europe in order to  

reduce the gas emissions. Green house 
gas emissions and protect our planet  

and the environment for the next generation.
So, what should be done by -- I say economic  

implications as well. Because in order to 
maintain the operation of the currently-operating  

lignite power plants in Greece, the public power 
corporation should invest a huge amount of money,  

hundreds of million, maybe billions, in 
modernizing the -- in reconstructing them  

so to be able to maintain the main operation. 
And sometimes meeting the environmental terms.
 

So, why someone to invest billions of Euro in 
lignite and not in jobs where you can produce  

energy, electricity three times cheaper even 
five times cheaper if you add a carbon tax?  

So, of course, this has some consequences.
It does. And I want to come to the consequences  

in a little bit. You want to make sure to 
get to all the panelists. Secretary Borosan,  

the contracts with Moldovan supply 
have been -- it's particularly hard  

with diplomatic tensions are up. How do they look 
at these with the risk of power and heat outages?
 

Indeed. Regional situation affects energy 
supplies, gas supplies to Moldova and  

to countries in the region. But I would like to 
stress that the government of Moldova has already  

taken some actions to strengthen our energy 
security. And that's we already approved new draft  

law on natural gas which impose obligations 
of suppliers to have minimal amounts of gas  

stored into the storages. That's one of 
the measures what we expect will attenuate  

other -- next possible crisis.
Also, we're working on  

diversification of sources and 
routes of supply of electricity. And  

last evolutions in this regard and dimension 
here, synchronization of our power system  

and Ukraine power system with continual Europe. 
We will significantly contribute to strengthen our  

stability of power system to 
work -- to work stable and to  

have access to other sources of electricity.
These sound like some good first steps and I'm  

excited to see what happens with Moldovan in the 
future. Now to Miss Lucia Bakulumpagi-Wamala.  

Your company, Bakulu Power, provides power 
particularly through mini grids. I wonder  

if you can tell us about the benefits of the 
decentralized approach in the energy transition.  

Especially in the social area, you spoke about 
it before, but this is important to talk about.
 

Absolutely. Decentralization plays a really 
important role. When people think of power  

projects, people think of -- of course, my 
iPad would fall as I'm talking. Think of  

grand Renaissance or grand Inga. But the smaller 
projects like ours, mini grids, can actually get  

people and communities electrified a lot faster. 
Of course, the sources of power are not as huge.  

But when you're dealing with communities that have 
never had electricity, they may not necessarily  

need such a robust generation to begin with.
And also, a big benefit of decentralized is that  

you can -- if the grid does get extended 
eventually, you can just kind of add them in,  

you know? You can feed in these mini 
grids into the big national grid. So,  

I think the biggest benefit is -- is the speed.
That's a great benefit. I'm happy to see that  

we're having problems with iPads both live 
and online. I appreciate the solidarity.  

We're gonna go ahead and stay with one of our 
virtual visitors, I would like to turn to Minister  

Pompili. How has your government motivated 
French citizens to become an active part of  

the ecological transition? Do you have one area 
that's succeeded and maybe one area that's proved  

to be more of a hard sell? Minister Pompili?
Yes, achieving France climate and energy  

objectives depends on the diverse and 
complementary mix of public policies. The daily  

commitment of each citizen is necessary. And the 
climate, and the lifestyles and the conception,  

citizens become key players in the low carbon 
transition. they influence the economy as a whole.  

Because the fight against climate change will have 
concrete impacts on our citizens, we organized a  

public conference using a dedicated web platform. 
It's proposed to feed into the roadmap fueled  

by the public. Another example of large-scale 
involvement of citizens is the French citizens  

convention on climate. A national debate in 
December 2018 has shown a strong demand for more  

participatory democracy and a just transition.
So, the President Macron decided to organize  

an unprecedented initiative to include citizens 
in a participative convention on climate.  

The French citizens convention on climate, were 
asked for measures to reach the climate target.  

And 150 citizens were chosen randomly and 
worked from 9 month with dozens of experts  

to propose concrete measures. And in the 
end, the members of the Convention adopted  

149 measures covering all sectors, 
mobility, conception, housing, production,  

and food. The French climate and residence law 
voted last year in Parliament is directly inspired  

from the citizens' proposals. And its ambition 
is to spur a major change in society.
 

And, for instance, we have introduced new 
obligations in terms of terminal innovation  

of building, and created innovation coaches that 
will help households in the planning and design  

of their innovation project. We are pushing 
environmental leveling for that to reflect  

the climate impact of good. And we have banned 
internal flights when there is an alternative by  

rail in less than 2 hours and enough.
And last, we are making vegetarian  

options available in public and university 
canteens. So, on and so forth. As you see,  

it's a full range of measures that will imply 
also a revolution in the citizens' behavior.
 

Definitely a full range. But it sounds like 
the people are starting to enjoy them. That's  

fantastic. Bringing it back to our hall, I 
would like to come to Minister Shabazov again.  

How do you see the buildup of Azerbaijan's 
sustainability sector with employment creation  

and economic recovery. We're obviously still 
in a pandemic. But I would like you to speak  

to it briefly for about 2 minutes post-COVID.
You know, the stability in Azerbaijani energy  

sector has been achieved by the means of diversity 
of sources, rules, and markets. And we also  

wish to continue this policy of resilience, this 
strategy also in the future. And to this end,  

we are working very hard on the application 
and development of the renewable sources of  

energy. And we believe that the development 
of the renewable energy sector in Azerbaijan  

will contribute, as I have already 
mentioned in my previous comments,  

to the social world fair, economic development, 
and also environmental sustainability. And what  

we also do in Azerbaijan, last year we 
have -- we adopted two laws. One about  

the application of renewable sources of energy 
another one on energy efficiency. And as a result,  

we have been able to attract private 
sectors to the very large renewable -- the  

energy projects for solar and wind parks in 
Azerbaijan. And this process is going on.  

So, we don't want to burden the -- the 
country's budget for these purposes.  

Rather than attract the private sectors. And we 
have been successful and we will continue this way  

hoping that it will contribute into the 
further economic and social development of  

our country and, of course, will positively 
influence the employment opportunities.
 

Thank you very much, Minister Shabazov. Minister 
Gewessler, now, Austria is a technological leader  

when it comes to carbon-intensive industry 
such as paper and metal production. How does  

Austria plan to make the technological edge to 
make carbon 2024 as is Austria's stated goal.
 

Of course. We want to be carbon neutral by 2040. 
Mentioned by Kostas, and in many sectors, but else  

the hard to mitigate sectors in energy. This is 
a focus. But I'm 100% convinced this is not only  

a challenge, but it's a huge chance. It's a 
huge chance for innovation, for employment,  

for also technological leadership in many 
sectors. And Austria has done it before.  

Look at steel production decades ago, an 
Austrian company created a new process,  

still used for the majority of steel production 
worldwide. That's the task we have to do again.  

To do it in a climate-neutral way. How do 
we go about that? I think it needs the right  

framework conditions. Also legal -- in law that 
we are here as politicians responsible for. So,  

I see our renewables deployment act 100% renewable 
electricity by 2030 is one step of that equation.
 

Because the stable and price competitive 
electricity supply is at the base. Much of this  

will be about electrification, green hydrogen, 
that's the basic. The second is, of course,  

this needs extensive investments. And this needs 
extensive investments in a competitive environment  

that's also there globally. So, this also needs 
support. We are talking about a just transition  

with a few individual households earlier. We also 
need to look at it with the view of who are the  

sectors that have the biggest challenges in the 
industry that need special support? Because for  

most of them, this means really a disruption in 
business models, completely new buzz models and  

product portfolios. It needs new production 
processes, long investment cycles. Also in  

politics we have to step up to that challenge and 
develop our support mechanisms accordingly. That's  

where we use the European recovery fund money 
for a transformation of industry fund. That's  

why in our new climate law, we have embedded a 
transformation fund with a longer term perspective  

also in support mechanisms for industry outside 
of the ETAs. And that's also why we build another  

mechanism for the ETS side of industry 
because we just need to acknowledge that  

this technological step change that we 
have is going to need public support.
 

But if this comes together, the good legal 
framework at European level, we do this with the  

cash border adjustment. At the national level with 
the energy regulation and the support mechanisms I  

think this is exactly the -- and the third factor, 
let's not forget. The companies who have CEOs who  

now understand this is the time to do this leap 
into a climate neutrality production process. Then  

I think we really have all the ingredients there 
to actually make use of this position and because  

this will be the demand of the future. The future. 
Green products. Green production processes.
 

I love that you brought in there public support 
because that's the next question I would like to  

address to all of you. It's about public support. 
Engaging communities from the bottom up is  

critical to this big job that we have in front of 
us. And realizing the full potential of renewable  

energy sources. We have about 7 minutes for this, 
which means each of you gets about a minute. So,  

I want to ask you for one. Mean or method, what 
way have you come up or made use of that you found  

to be particularly effective to have inclusive 
and just participation and inclusive process?  

Minister?
Let me say  

right now currently in Greece they operate more 
than 700 energy communities with the capacity  

in -- of more than half a gigawatt. We also are 
going to utilize more than 100 million Euro from  

the resilience and recovery fund in order to 
promote and support energy communities that  

will be granted 100% of the cost. In order 
to subsidize and reduce the energy costs  

they pay. So, we're talking about vulnerable 
households. This is a way also to mitigate  

and tackle the services of the lignitizaion 
processing in Macedonia taking place in Greece.
 

Thank you very much. And one of the 
virtual attendees, Minister Pompili,  

one thing that France has come up 
with that's especially effective.
 

Thank you. The French government has taken 
several measures to help local authorities  

develop new energy projects. With our ecological 
agency, we have launched a network of laws  

that will help local authorities to better plan 
the deployment of renewable in their territory  

by providing information on renewable 
technologies and guidelines to enhance  

local acceptance. Like planification, 
local consultation, else. We want to help  

communities to be actors of the energy transition  

by developing self-conception projects which can 
benefit from a simple support scheme. We are also  

working on creating a regulatory framework for 
energy communities that will allow the members  

to produce, share, and sell their energy.
And last November I announced ten measures  

to accelerate the development of participatory 
projects by local stakeholders. In particular  

I set a national target of a thousand new 
projects by 2028. And finally, the French  

government is currently consulting on the revision 
of its energy and climate roadmap. This discussion  

will help define national and regional goals that 
will be shared by all the interested parties.
 

Thank you very much, Minister Pompili. I 
would like to go back to Minister Gewessler.
 

I can really continue where Barbara left off. 
Energy communities is a big issue for us. I  

mentioned it in the very beginning. As Kostas 
also described. I will not go into this a lot.  

I would like to bring in another thought. It's 
the question of what does Just Transition mean?  

And this leap towards energy transition for the 
labor market and for the people actually working  

in sectors that will now face big changes. And 
so, what we did in Austria is we started a Just  

Transition process together with the Chamber of 
Labor, the trade unions, but also the employers  

association. And looked at the sectors that 
are carbon-intensive and labor-intensive to see  

not only where we need additional qualifications. 
Because if we want to have 1 million PV on the  

roofs by 2030, I need people to put them up. How 
do we train workforce? Where do we get the people?  

But also to look at the sectors that 
really face change because there's  

people in there with personal histories 
who are proud about what they do. And then  

we say, but now things have to change.
So, what do we need to accompany this change also  

in the -- in the labor market? And in -- with 
all the structural and regional aspects all of  

this has. And that's why we brought together 
all the actors. We'll present the first action  

plan for the energy and -- so, the heating and 
electricity sector in the first quarter of this  

year. And then we come up with a set of measures 
what we have to do in order to make sure that  

I think taking people along is -- is not the right 
framing for what actually the task is. But for  

really making people actors in this transition. 
And empower them to be part of this transition.
 

Absolutely. They are a part of this 
transition. Minister Shabazov.
 

Yes. We also working on the development, 
the different forms and ways of the  

support mechanisms for the active consumers of 
the electricity energy. And at the same time,  

we on the liberated territories of Azerbaijan 
we are now in a process of building some smart  

villages. Which will then fully regulated and 
managed for the local authorities, municipalities,  

energy communities. And also due to the -- the 
green energy concept for the whole Karabakh  

region, we are going to install on every house the 
solar panel or solar collectors to provide these  

households with the renewable sources of energy.
So, they are the different mechanisms that we are  

working on that. And in most cases, we tried to 
attract also private sectors to this process.
 

Cooperation between the public and the private 
sector is absolutely going to be vital to make  

the energy transition happen. We'll go to our 
virtual guest again, Lucia Bakulumpagi-Wamala.
 

Yeah. As a project developer working with 
the community is, as I mentioned earlier,  

it's our first step. You know, a model on energy 
projects is very difficult. You want to -- I mean,  

as assuming you're a for-profit company, you have 
to model very, very, very close to reality. So,  

when we work in deep rural communities, there are 
no benchmarks. These are communities that are not  

electrified at all. And during our socio-economic 
study, we hired trusted community members to knock  

on doors with us to try and gather data for our 
modeling. So, trusted community members such as  

teachers and nurses because you can have the 
best intentions, but you can't force someone  

to use the electricity you want to bring. And you 
have to earn their trust. And for us, you know,  

I think a lot of times we talk about energy, we 
forget that these are people. These are people's  

lives. People want jobs, people want dignity. So, 
we cannot skip over working with the communities.  

Much like we cannot skip over working with 
the regulators. We also work very closer  

regulators in Uganda. Because we want 
projects that will be built, that will  

be used. A lot of times the modeling is wrong. 
And projects, you know, developers go bankrupt.
 

So, the community is who we're really doing 
everything for. And we even have a profit  

sharing agreement as part of our business 
model. And then we have been happy to go  

on and on at another time. With just so 
the on the ground real life experience.
 

That would be fantastic. We don't have the time in 
today's panel because I want to make sure to hear  

from Moldova. Secretary Borosan.
Yes, concerning  

citizens energy community, energy communities as 
a form of business still for Moldova this is to  

be transposed into a national legislation. Since 
it came from clean energy package. But, however,  

instrument which is encouraging small-scale 
projects in national legislation, this  

is net mechanism. And we see high demand 
for such -- for such support mechanism from  

residential sector. Especially since this offers 
flexibility for consumers to use electricity  

and electrify or heat their homes 
with electricity. And when we discuss  

about a just transition, I think that we 
need to go into definition of this -- of this  

term. And this is especially 
right for emerging economies.  

And I think we need to consider access to 
technologies and access to affordable or  

flexible financing mechanisms to allow bottom-up 
approach and increasing renewable energy  

expansion from the root, let's say, in this way.
Absolutely. And I have to say what a pleasure it  

also is to see our panelists here in the hall. 
Nodding along with you. It's really an absolute  

pleasure. I have to say, it has been a great honor 
of mine to be able to speak with you all today.  

I'm sure you're looking at the clocks as well. 
Our time is going to be wrapping up. But I  

want to allow each of you to give a final 
statement. I'll have to ask you to leave about  

a minute for the final statements. Back to Lucia 
Bakulumpagi-Wamala for her final statements.
 

My final statement is really short and quick. 
I'm more than happy to keep discussing things  

on social media. You can reach me @luciaWamala 
on Instagram and Twitter. Just reach out.
 

I think that's fantastic. Definitely 
reach out. This is what this is all about.  

It's about dialogue, speaking with one 
another. I'm happy you're letting people  

know to reach out to you. Back to you for 
a final statement, Secretary Borosan.
 

Moldova has expressed its high 
ambition in the contributions  

submitted being the fourth country which 
submitted its revised ambition. And now has  

the main word of this -- word of this event 
is time for -- from ambition to action.  

So, we will -- we need to move in this direction.
Absolutely. We do need to move in this direction.  

I'm going to move in this 
direction to Minister Skrekas.
 

Currently Europe is leading the world regarding 
the carbon neutrality. But we are all part of  

this. We fully serve this European vision, 
this ambitious vision. Of course, there are  

extreme conditions and situations 
currently that we have to tackle.  

So, Europe and all together we should act 
now in order to protect this vision. And,  

of course, to support the most vulnerable that are 
facing currently quite severe situations regarding  

these price spikes and the way they should carry. 
So, in order for this to be implemented in time,  

maybe even sooner now, because now it seems it 
is proven to be so critical because it's not only  

the -- the -- the de-linked -- let's say 
to be de-linked from the Russian gas, it is  

to regain our energy independency as Europe.
So, all together, both energy security  

and energy transition to carbon neutrality 
I think show the way. And for that,  

we should act as a unity and act quickly.
Absolutely. Acting together and acting quickly.  

Very important parts. Minister 
Gewessler, your final comments.
 

Again, I can immediately pick up from where my 
colleague left off. Because it is exceptional  

times. And it's not the first gas crisis 
that we live. It's an exceptional -- it's  

exceptional because it's now based on an actual 
war in European territory which really I think  

everybody shares sort of the concern in this. 
But it means that the energy transition is not  

any longer only about -- well, it never was. But 
maybe it's not only about climate action, yeah?  

But I think it has become blatantly clear that 
this is also about security policy. That this  

is about independence. That this is about so 
much more. It's probably also about democracy.  

And so, that we really need to -- this needs 
to be the lesson out of the situation. That  

we really need to speed up implementation of 
the energy transition. Every windmill that we  

put up this year is a sign for independence, 
is a step towards independence. Every fossil  

heating system that we change this year is 
a path -- is a step in the right direction.
 

And I think this must be the lesson that's not 
postponed. But let's advance this common effort.  

And let's do it together, obviously. Learn 
from each other. Thanks for they haven't.
 

Exactly. Thank you so much. And it's true. This 
is something we have to do together. It's such  

a pleasure to see so many of you agreeing with 
one another and picking up where the other person  

left off. I would like to move to Minister 
Pompili of France for her final statements.
 

Thank you. And thank you again for this 
interesting debate on the key issues.  

And in line with what I just heard, as an economic 
crisis caused by the pandemic. The longer term  

crisis driven by global warming and this crisis 
we are facing in Ukraine are not mutually isolated  

crisis. And must be tackled jointly. It's 
essential that the recovery put us on the path  

towards carbon neutrality by mid-century. 
But it is also essential that the benefits of  

decarbonization be equally shared and distributed. 
Otherwise the goal of carbon neutrality will prove  

politically unsustainable as it would increase 
inequalities. So, we need to ramp up our efforts  

towards a just transition for the workers and the 
retirees obviously impacted by the transition.  

These efforts must be part of our green recovery 
plan. So, we have so many work to do. Thank you.
 

We do have a lot of work to do. It's true. 
And it's good that all of us -- that you all  

also recognize this. We would like to end with our 
final statement from Minister Parviz Shabazov.
 

Thank you very much.  

The renewable energy source is a universal source. 
Which allows all the countries to provide for  

their energy supply. And without even having the 
natural traditional hydrocarbons sources become  

the energy producing country. And it is important 
for economy, it's important for environment, it's  

important for the energy security and, of 
course, independence. And here I would like also  

to mention that this process should be -- this 
transition process -- should be well-thought out.  

And should be very smart one. And we have to go -- 
we have to realize it in a way that we always go  

forward. Not backwards. That's why we have to take 
care about international cooperation. We have to  

stay together. And provide for the better results 
at the end. Thank you for this excellent panel.
 

This excellent panel is really because of the 
six of you that are here. And I have to say,  

what a pleasure it has been. I know that we have 
a huge digital audience following us online today.  

I would like once begun to wrap up this panel by 
thanking my bests who are here. Minister Shabazov,  

the Minister of the Ecological Transition. 
Joining us online, Minister Pompili,  

Minister of the Ecological Transition. Minister 
Gewessler, Federal Minister for Climate Action,  

Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and 
Technology for Austria. Minister Kostas Skrekas,  

the Minister of Environment & Energy for Greece. 
Just to my right, joining us at the transition  

dialogue, the State Secretary for Energy, 
Ministry of Infrastructure & Regional Development.  

And Lucia Bakulumpagi-Wamala of Bakulu 
Power. I'm going to go ahead and give  

you a round of applause because I think 
we all deserve it. Thank you so much.


