Russia's war of aggression in Ukraine has caused 
immeasurable suffering, and fundamentally changed  

the world overnight. Chancellor Schulze is right 
to speak of a watershed moment. The war is shaking  

up many things we thought were certain in 
security policy, but also in energy policy.  

For it starkly shows us that dependence 
on the use of fossil fuels is dangerous.  

Not only in the long term, 
but also at this very moment.  

But one crisis unfortunately does not chase 
away all the other crises. On the contrary,  

crises reinforce one another. The COVID-19 
pandemic is not yet over, and as the new  

report of the intergovernmental panel on climate 
change shows, climate change is also increasing.  

Greenhouse gas emissions are rising again and at 
present, half of mankind is acutely affected by  

the climate crisis, and the window of 
opportunity for mankind to act is closing soon.  

To be able better to fight these crises, we need 
a broader understanding of security and invest  

preventively in human security, climate action 
and environmental protection play a central role  

in this. If you want to prevent further disasters, 
destabilisation and crises, we must, despite the  

COVID-19 pandemic, despite war, take even faster 
action on climate protection in order to prevent  

global warming from exceeding 1.5 degrees Celsius. 
The energy sector has a key role to play in this.  

It accounts for more than two thirds 
of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide.  

And global energy demand is growing continuously.  

By 2040, global demand could increase by one 
third. Development and emerging countries  

in particular need increasingly more energy 
to promote economic growth, to create jobs,  

to forest social participation and reduce 
poverty. We urgently need to make the green  

energy and climate transition even faster and 
drive it forward more consistently worldwide.  

Ladies and gentlemen, the industrialised countries 
have an important role to play here. They are the  

ones that are most responsible for climate 
change so it is the responsibility of these  

countries to lead the way with ambition bushes 
climate protection control and measures,  

and we must support the countries of the 
Global South which are most affected by  

the consequences of climate change and help them 
on the path to green and sustainable development  

in their efforts to switch to renewable energy 
systems that meet their needs. This is important,  

because the seventh sustainability 
development goal also applies to them.  

They too have the right to affordable, 
reliable, and sustainable energy.  

The potential of renewables 
for emerging countries is huge.  

Many of these countries have very good use for 
solar energy, hydropower, or wind power. The use  

of green energy sources improves the energy supply 
and boosts their economies. It also strengthens  

their independence and energy supply security. 
This is because decentralised energy production,  

for example, from hydropower plants, or solar 
grids, reduce depend Wednesday on imports and  

central grids. Disadvantaged rural regions that 
still have no adequate access to electricity  

particularly benefit from this. Renewable 
energies are powerful drivers of development  

that enable developing countries to leaf frog 
stages of development, in other words, they help  

poorer countries to avoid a carbon lock-in which 
means dependence on bridging energies such as gas.  

Instead, renewables help them 
to put the energy supply on a  

climate-friendly basis right from the start. This 
will benefit all. The green energy transition  

proposals sustainable and robust development in 
the respective countries and at the same time  

advances global climate action. Of course 
considerable investments are needed to realise  

this potential but such investments will make good 
sense and pay off because it's more effective and  

less expensive to minimise climate risk from 
the outset than to repair damage later on.  

Combating climate change is one of the most 
important priorities of the German Federal  

Government. Germany is firmly committed to the 
Paris climate goals and the 2030 agenda for  

sustainable development and strongly proposals 
a transitional energy - the Federal Minister  

for economic co-operation supports emerging 
countries around the globe in decarbonising  

the energy sector and embarking on the path 
towards sustainable climate-friendly development.  

And, present, this is more urgent than ever. 
The Russian attack on Ukraine has led to rising  

energy prices. This will be particularly felt 
in developing countries that rely on energy  

imports and are not in a position to alleviate 
the negative consequences of price increases. A  

key focus of our efforts is on our climate and 
development partnerships. Here, we work closely  

with partner countries committed to climate policy 
to support them in transforming their systems to  

achieve climate neutrality, climate resilience, 
and sustainability. This month, I signed such a  

partnership with a pioneer for climate action 
in Africa. Our ministry will support Rwanda in  

delivering on its ambitious NDCs and help Rwanda 
to drive forward sustainability urban development.  

The partnership also serves to strengthen the 
dialogue on climate policy as well as foster  

co-operation with the scientific community, 
the private sector, and civil society.  

And we plan further partnerships in the future. 
We've been working closely with the north African  

countries in the field of energy transition 
for several decades. This is because they have  

ideal conditions for renewable energy, and 
the production, export and use of hydrogen.  

This could drive the decarbonisation of sectors 
difficult to electrify. In addition, we rely on  

co-operation with ambitious emerging countries, 
which as major emitters, play an important role  

in achieving the 1.5 degree target because 
they have strong influence in the region  

and can therefore act as catalysts for 
global climate action. For me, however,  

energy transition does not really mean a technical 
transformation of the energy sector. For me, it is  

a much more a social, economic transforming. The 
energy transition must be social ly acceptable.  

For this to happen, all the people must be 
included and benefit from the structural change.  

At this point, allow me to stress the guiding 
principle of the 2030 agenda of leaving no-one  

behind. I work so that the transformation is fair, 
in other words, a just transition. As is the case  

with every change in society as a whole, there 
are people for whom the energy transition comes  

with losses and disadvantages. People working 
in carbon-intensive industries who lose their  

jobs. It is important to create new prospects 
for these people and their families. This means  

creating new employment opportunities, providing 
training and skills programmes, and developing  

social protection and safety nets. This is all 
part of Germany's development, co-operation,  

and we will actively address these issues 
with our partners. At multi-lateral level too,  

the government is building effective alliances 
to accelerate the global energy and climate  

transition. During its G7 presidency this year, 
the German government will focus on the topic of  

just energy transition and expand partnerships in 
this field, and in this way we want to mobilise  

additional fund for the energy transition, also 
with the help of the prime sector and the banks.  

The just energy partnership with South Africa, 
which Germany presented together with the UK,  

the US, France, and the EU, at the 2021 climate 
conference in Glasgow, is a good example here.  

Under this partnership, South Africa has committed 
to overcoming its co-dependency and to cutting 1.5  

gigatons of emissions over the next 20 years. 
Given South Africa's role in the electricity  

supply in the region, the partnership also has 
an impact that goes beyond the country's borders.  

Let me thank our British partners and Kwasi 
Kwarteng who co-ordinated the actions to build  

in partnership. The just energy partnerships, 
the Federal Ministry will work closely  

with the Federal Foreign Office, the Federal 
ministry for foreign affairs and the environment.  

We want to build on the successes of the Glasgow 
climate conference and the infrastructure  

partnership there initiated by the UK. At 
the next climate change conference in Egypt,  

my ministry, together with Jennifer Morgan, 
the special envoy for special climate policy  

at the federal Foreign Office will push for 
a faster transition to renewable energy.  

This is not a luxury. It is not a burden 
but an investment in the future, a future  

that offers great er prosperity and a 
greater quality of life, offering union niece  

sustainability ... the Federal Government is 
determined to make the most of it. Thank you.


