Good morning - Guten Morgen. My name is Hilda 
Nakabuye. I'm the founder of Uganda's Friday  

Friday Friday movement. Uganda is found in Africa, 
a continent that emits less than 4% of the global  

carbon emissions, and yet it is the most affected. 
Uganda is the twelfth most vulnerable country  

in the world to climate change, and the 49th 
least prepared country to combat its effects.  

My country is yet to host the world's 
longest heated oil pipeline, built  

by the French company Total. It will be 1,145 
kilometres long from Uganda to the port of Tanga  

in Tanzania, bypassing critical biodiversity 
areas, it will put major national parks, wetlands,  

rivers and lakes, critical biodiversity and 
not to mention livelihoods of millions at risk.  

It has displaced about 100,000 
people, 400 villages, including mine.  

Living as homeless and impoverished, 
in these unprecedented times of Covid,  

a third of this African pipeline will 
be built in Lake Victoria benzine,  

the second biggest source of fresh water in the 
world, and a source of food to millions of people.  

This water body is the biggest inland lake in 
Africa. Up to 40 million lives depend on this,  

which increases the risk for further diversity 
and human impacts in case of an oil spill.  

It will emit 34.3 million metric tonnes of carbon 
a year, which greatly undermines our efforts to  

reduce global emissions and stable 1.5 degrees 
Celsius. This is dangerous and unacceptable.  

Developed countries like France and 
Germany have built fossil fuels,  

have burnt fossil fuels for many years, but 
the appetite for oil and coal is still high.  

I have come here today to remind you 
that the greed exhibited by your leaders,  

and the Noble North co-operations is a danger 
to the lives of people in Africa. It is a  

danger to our wildlife and a threat to future 
generations. The global north is to greedy to  

think about the children of Africa who go hunger 
as a result of climate change-induced famine.  

The global north is too greedy to 
think about the children who go hungry  

due to human induced famine. The Global North 
love for fossil fuel is growing every day. This  

love is a cause of death to indigenous people. 
It is harming birds, wild animals, and humans  

that bacterium the brunt of the climate crisis. 
Please stop contributing to the climate crisis.  

You're putting an end to innocent lives. Global 
north tab noble north why Germany? Why France?  

Why Europe? Why the climate injustices 
against Africans, Asians, Latinos,  

and the rest of the Global South? Why don't 
you give us a chance to live? From colonialism,  

apartheid, to climate change - is this 
another form of injustice we have to endure?  

You don't care because you can afford to adapt to 
climate change and yet we can't. France is aware  

Uganda is amongst the most vulnerable countries 
to climate change and one of the countries least  

prepared to combat its effects, but its oil giant, 
Total, is determined to worsen the situation.  

German company RWE is aware villages 
are being displaced but does not care.  

Coal must stop. We should stop expansion of 
oil, gas, and coal if we want to stay alive.  

Developed countries are switching 
from fossil fuels to renewable energy,  

yet forcing poor countries to open new 
oil-wells and build pipelines. The East  

African Crude Pipeline is a clear evidence that 
Europe is not about to stop banning fossil fuels.  

Europe developed by burning fossil fuels, but 
that is not the path we want to take. Uganda  

and the rest of Africa wants to develop but 
not at the expense of nature and human lives.  

Development should not come at the cost or at 
the expense of nature. Fossil fuels must be kept  

in the ground. Uganda tab Uganda. I know that the 
German Export Credit Agency could provide finances  

foreign the East African Crude Oil Pipeline, and 
I'm here to tell you this is a terrible idea.  

We need investment in renewable energy. Africa 
receives sunlight throughout the year. This is  

a gift. Let's unwrap it. And I call on Deutsche 
Bank, German's biggest bank, to stop supporting  

Total Energies, and RWE that are displacing 
people and villages, putting profits above people.  

This is not the way to go. 100 billion in 
military? Why not invest in renewable energy?  

The future is sustainable and clean. Let's keep 
it that way, and let's work towards it. This  

is a time in history where humanity shifts to a 
clear level of understanding, no sugar-coating,  

no greenwashing. Saying the truth as it is. 
The ball is in your hands, Germany. Europe,  

to choose what side of history you will be 
remembered on, and, at the end of this, I hope  

that we do not drown in our own pride. It is time 
to turn words and promises into action. Thank you.


