Hello, and welcome back to the Europasaal 
for a very exciting panel discussion on  

energy transition and energy security. Twins or 
opposites? Right now we're going to look at how  

the energy transition can foster energy security. 
And there is a lot to cover in this panel. I'm  

going to get right to the introductions because I 
think this is a big topic we have to cover today.
 

I would like to start on the left of 
the room with Virgil-Daniel Popescu,  

the Minister of Energy of Romania. Thank 
you for being here today. Luigi di Maio,  

Minister of Foreign Affairs and International 
Cooperation and international cooperation in  

industry. Benoit Revaz, the State Secretary of 
the Swiss federal office of energy. Thank you  

for being here. Digitally, Dorte Fouquet, the 
director. Thank you. And joining us virtually,  

Rina Bohle Zeller, Senior Specialist Global 
Public Affairs at Vestas. Thank you for joining  

us. We might have an additional panelist 
joining us. I'll introduce him if he arrives.
 

For the panelists, the Russian invasion of 
Ukraine and the war that has now started -- it's  

having an immediate and far-reaching effect on how 
we look at energy security and we will come back  

later in the panel. To start off, I 
have the same question for all of you  

and ask you for the opening round to limit your 
responses to 2 minutes each. Based on your own  

country's experience, what are the main challenges 
when it comes to energy security. I would like to  

start off with Minister di Maio of Italy.
Thank you very much. I would like to  

tell to all of you that it's a pleasure to be 
here. And about the energy security. As Italy,  

we are working on two directions. On the European 
level, a strategic plan for the European security  

about energy. And it's clear that in order to 
attain an energy security we have to accelerate  

the long-term process of the ecological 
transition and energy transition.  

But in the short-term, we have to develop more 
some aspects of our European Union energy,  

Union's energy. Because now, for example, there 
are not interconnected -- interconnections between  

the countries of European Union and so we have 
a spare capacity in the terminals on the west,  

for example. On the western side. But we do not 
have the interconnectors to face the challenge of  

the gas. And to give the gas to other countries.
On the national side, we are working about a  

plan of energy security that consists in the 
diversification of energy sources. We have three  

pipelines with north Africa, Nigeria, Libya and 
a pipeline with Azerbaijan. And we are investing  

about the increasing of partnership with these 
countries. Not only before Italy. Because this  

is very well interconnected with Germany, 
for example, and could be in a reverse flow  

system can be useful -- may be useful even 
for you in view of a short-term crisis.  

But I would like to underline again the first goal 
remain the energy and ecological transition. And I  

think that we have to accelerate this process in 
order to attain the independence from blackmail  

like the Russian blackmail on the gas.
Thank you very much, Minister. I would like to get  

Romania's perspective. Please, Minister Popescu.
Thank you for inviting me. I fully agree with my  

colleague, we have to continue our transition 
to green energy. But we have to also face  

the short time period challenges. And I 
think all our agreed that what happened  

beginning with last year with the price of 
gas, with increasing the price of gas was --  

was made up by the Russian in order to then to 
continue with aggression, with the war in Ukraine.  

And then to blackmail Europe according to gas and 
now, as I said now, that we have to pay in rubles.  

Anyway. We have to face these short challenges.
And let's say Romania is a little bit lucky  

because it's one of the less dependent 
countries of Russian gas. We have our  

own resources of gas. We want to extract the 
gas from the Black Sea and we want to become  

a regional supplier of natural gas with the 
Romanian gas. We did our pipelines. We did  

pipelines which is a common project of common 
interest. We are waiting for our colleagues from  

Greek and Bulgaria to finalize interconnector 
between Greek and Bulgaria and finally to be  

ready as a vertical corridor to bring the 
gas from Azerbaijan and as well as the gas  

from Greece. Through Eastern Europe and through 
Central Europe. We already built a pipeline  

with north Romania in order to link Republic 
of Moldova with a source of gas from Romania.
 

So, we are doing our -- we are doing our job and 
we want to contribute to the security of supply  

and to the diversification of supply. We also 
finally last year operationalize a new corridor  

of transport of gas. Intervocalic corridor 
in 2020 after the new council of gas Romania.  

The new transit pipelines to the Romanian and 
national system, make the flow with the border  

of Bulgaria and the border of Ukraine. We have 
the new corridor of transport, the intervocalic  

corridor that can flow from Bulgaria and Turkey. 
And bring gas from Azerbaijan and along the  

corridor and also from Turkey.
Thank you very much.
 

We do our job and work with Europe.
Thank you very much. I would like to  

turn to a Swiss perspective. Benoit Revaz.
Thank you. We can to improve the decarbonization.  

Building the refurbishment and the 
mobility, these are the actions we  

are running or intensifying . and to take the 
international perspective as already mentioned,  

the cooperation has to be intensified now to 
find solutions to put forces together. It is not  

the solution in such difficult situation.
Thank you very much. Now to our virtual guests.  

Professor Dorte Fouquet, perhaps you 
can give us a European perspective.
 

Yes. Certainly, what I can say now, first 
of all, thank you for having me. And the big  

compliment to you as moderator. I followed the 
other sessions. And you're doing an amazingly good  

job. On the issue itself, I think the aggression 
war, as we all know by Russia against Ukraine  

made us strangely -- and very good 
-- made us much more united as  

the European Union. And that is something 
I think Mr. Putin was not counting on. So,  

saying that, we have our current work which we 
started with the 50 for 55 pathway after Paris.  

We will increase our endeavors to have much more 
renewable energy in our system. And the current  

discussions are having interesting. And the 
level of the European Union with the parliament,  

with the council, with the commission, for 
example, concerning our new renewable energy  

directive. The three director which is 
under discussion in parliament and council.
 

We are talking about the targets. 40% is in the 
proposal by the commission. And we will certainly  

need more. And also, when I hear the very serious 
and earnest messages by the Italian Minister and  

by the Romanian Minister, I think it would be a 
sign of seriousness if the council will now also  

agree to go back to binding target per member 
state. So, that they can be accounted for.
 

Thank you very much, Dr. Fouquet. Thank you 
for the lovely compliment. That was great.  

Incredible panelists like you make 
my job easy. Back to the panelists.  

Rina Bohle Zeller, maybe you can 
give us a global perspective.
 

Thank you. And first of all, thank you also for 
having me here on the panel. The energy transition  

is rapidly advancing. By we have to remind 
ourselves that renewables account now for about  

28% of the global electricity generation. But 
make only 12% of the world's total energy supply.  

And to get the world back on net zero compatible 
growth path, we have to half emissions by 2030.  

Wind and solar capacity has to more than quadruple 
by 2030. And exponential growth is required as  

well for grid build out of flexibility solutions 
on the supply and demand side. Think of storage  

or demand-side management. Yet growth for the 
next few years remain far below what's needed.  

One reason being, the lengthy permitting process. 
It can take over 10 years to get a building permit  

and the slow transition line expansion 
in Germany is yet another example.
 

Thankfully, governments across the 
world are increasingly aware of  

removing permitting bottlenecks. But even 
if they were to succeed, there are further  

challenges to take on delivering on energy 
efficiency. Avoiding the paradox. Leaving  

space for renewables with minimal impacts 
on diversity, delivering the just transition  

and the raw materials and the transport of 
the hardware for the energy transition.
 

Thank you so much. We'll come back to you for 
sure. Right now I want to come back and direct  

a question now to the Minister from Italy. 
You quoted Elon Musk in mid-March with these  

words. I have to read them here. I hate to 
say this, but we have to increase oil and  

gas production immediately. Extraordinary 
times require extraordinary measures.  

You talked about the urgent need to accelerate 
the process to diversify roots to free there'll  

as much as possible from Russian market. 
Does diversifying those supply routes also  

mean incorporating more renewable energy sources.
Yes. It is clear that we are in an extraordinary  

time. And it's clear that we are hearing from 
the Elon Musk profile on Twitter these kinds of  

words is clear that we are in emergency time 
now. And we have to overtake this problem  

with these initiatives. I would 
like to underline that it's not only  

a crisis about energy. I think that countries like 
Italy, but all the countries of European Union are  

changing in a way even before the first policy.
We work very well. And we are taking  

some decisions about our energy policy. And 
we are taking some decisions about our policy.  

For example, the pipeline that the Minister 
mentioned from the south southern east flank of  

European Union, it's crucial even for Moldova. And 
Moldova is one of the countries that is suffering  

this crisis not only for the refugees, not only 
for the economic impact of the war in Ukraine.  

But even for the blackmail from the Russian 
side of the energy that started before the war.
 

In a sort of system where Russia is giving free 
-- the energy through -- they're selling energy  

with an incredible price to Moldova. If we want 
to start in a larger process with these countries,  

we have to change the energy policy in order 
to create the conditions for their independence  

from some interconnections of the past. For 
this reason, I think that Elon Musk underlined  

a problem in extraordinary time. But it's a 
short-term solution to increase the production  

of oil and gas. The long-term solution for 
our independence in order to avoid blackmail  

is the renewable energy and the clear energy. 
Because renewable energy are the starting point  

in order to attain a clear energy system.
Absolutely. Renewable energy is  

the way to go. I want to turn now to you, 
Minister Popescu. Speaking of renewable energy,  

Romania is turning more and more to 
renewable energy. What challenges,  

though, arise when you have an existing energy 
infrastructure that's not compatible with the  

future direction of energy supply? Minister?
I always say that the colleagues from European  

countries don't know the mix of Romania. The 
total production of low carbon energy is 60%  

in Romania. So, we have 40% renewables. That means 
solar, wind, and hydro. And 20% it's nuclear.  

Which is low carbon. The rest is gas and coal. 
So, we already have 60% of low carbon electricity.  

And we want more. We want more to invest in 
-- in wind. And we want more to invest in  

photovoltaic in solar farms. And we have in our 
resilience plan 1.6 billion Euro for energy. And  

also we have the modernization fund where we have 
15 billion Euro in 70% in priority investment for  

renewables and also this transmission 
of electricity. So, Romania is committed  

to increase the renewables capacity. And also 
committed to increase the nuclear energy.
 

We will align my state. We are supporting nuclear. 
And we say decarbonization without nuclear energy  

isn't possible. Because let's be honest, we don't 
want -- nobody wants to look if it's sunshine  

outside or the wind -- or we have wind in order 
to have electricity. So, we have to have also some  

base load production of electricity. And nuclear 
also is a solution. So, we are focused on nuclear,  

renewables. And winds. And photovoltaic. 
And also storage of electricity. Because  

what I said, we want to use electricity 
produced by renewables not only when it's  

wind and sunshine. But in the -- also in the 
other periods. That's why we need storage.
 

Thank you very much. I want to turn now to 
State Secretary Revaz. A question for you,  

I know Switzerland is undergoing massive changes 
to the energy system. But how to make sure modern  

energy systems are resilient and security.
 

Actually, the big challenge is to 
combine conventional infrastructure  

with the new systems put in place right now. As 
we know, all technologies are available. Another  

challenge is to integrate these technologies 
in order to double all infrastructure.  

And why is it so slow? I see different 
problems. President first one is investment  

capital to switch. At the level of country, 
regional level, corporate level, household level.  

The second challenge is the supply chain of 
products, of panels, cars, heat pumps, systems.  

In order to be able to accelerate 
installation of new system.
 

And the last challenge I see are the steps. 
The workforces and the competencies have to  

have the people that are able to increase, to 
install capacity. To loading systems and so on.
 

This idea of competencies and training. We 
just had a panel session here on this in the  

Europasaal just a few moments ago. This is a key 
point of some of the work that still needs to be  

done. I want to turn now to our virtual guests. 
Miss Fouquet, from your perspective, can the EU's  

target for expansion of renewable energies still 
be seen as sufficient with the Russian attack  

in Ukraine? And what measures can be made to make 
sure progress is made more quickly in this area.
 

Yeah. Thank you for the question. Naturally, I 
will say no. And the 40% we are having now as  

I said before proposed by the commission. We're 
not -- were even before the crisis initiated but  

Russia not enough as has been shown by studies, 
for example, by the energywendie in Germany. And  

starting a new research and dissemination effort 
together with the Vienna technical university  

to look at the compatibility of the incoming 
new renewable energy which we need and the  

system which is in place in many regions 
of the European Union and the benefits.
 

And the challenges, as has already 
been said, for example, the slow  

transition in authorization. The question of 
energy security as public interest whether it  

comes to renewable development. And all of these 
have to come together. I think and I'm pretty  

confident the European parliament, for 
example -- and that was also before  

the aggression against Ukraine started -- it's 
already calling for 45%. And I can also foresee  

up to 2030, I'm sorry. And I can also foresee 
more to be done on this pathway towards 2030  

when the renewable energy directive really will 
be passed through the legislative process.
 

So, that is -- that is one thing. And as has 
been said before, renewables are key. And again,  

the good old efficiency is key. And 
especially efficiency in those sectors  

where like heating and transport where we have 
had still too late overall development in this  

way. And also, we have to be more flexible in the 
power purchase world. How do we do agreements as  

industry? What is the industry doing itself 
to proud heating sources, for example,  

and energy sources? What will we do in sharing?
And then it comes also how costly the transition  

will be? And now I can -- we as renewable 
industry, we can see the question is more  

yeah. The short-term profiteers on the market in 
gas who are adding to the difficult situation by  

making in gas and petrol by making the prices 
explode further. And I think this is an issue  

also of social security which has to be tackled. 
It can not be that the petrol players make more  

and more profit and we in our communication, 
for example, by the commission on the -- on  

the re-power Europe in the face of the crisis. 
We try everything to bring prices down. As the  

Italian Minister has said for the households.
But there is a mismatch. It's not all Russia.  

We have also our own lessons to learn 
in this way from the barrel to the pump.  

So, that is one thing. So, we hope that the -- 
this crisis will accelerate, as I said before,  

the unity of the European, you know, to want to go 
greenhouse gas-neutral by 2050. And that includes  

phasing out of all the fossil gas. Be it nuclear, 
obviously. We need this unity to show itself to  

the world. That's why we would like to see binding 
obligation that member states say, okay. I get my  

act together on my own responsibility and I'm 
for binding targets up to 2030 for my country.
 

Thank you very much. I would like to turn 
to Miss Zeller. What have we overlooked?
 

Absolutely. Look at the raw materials, 
not just for the energy, but for every  

sector and product we consume. And the spark in 
the post-COVID demand is further amplified by the  

Russian invasion into the Ukraine and impacting 
now each and every sector. Fertilizer increase  

and as a result food prices are skyrocketing. Chip 
shortages, and renewable energy manufacturers also  

increase by very high raw material prices. 
Some of them operating at brink or even  

below profitability. So, moving towards a circular 
economy will certainly help alleviate the need  

for raw materials. But fully recyclability is not 
achievable today. Or by a lot of efforts are right  

now under way. We, for example, work on recyclable 
wind blades, preserving the value of the materials  

after the recycling process. Enabling a 
reuse without downgrading the quality.
 

These kind of efforts should be encouraged 
in all sectors. Because otherwise we will  

in the long run, run into a supply chain 
bottlenecks that could increase the cost  

of the energy transition. And the current 
rise of inflation should be a wakeup call.  

achieving energy security through decarbonization 
requires very much holistic planning. Including  

not only the acceleration of the renewable energy 
build out, but material sourcing, recycling,  

projecting biodiversity. All kind of other 
aspects we are looking now into it in  

isolation. But we have to combine these together.
Absolutely. Thank you very much. I would like to  

address the elephant in the room, we have talked 
about it a little bit so far. The war in Ukraine.  

When it comes to energy, we want stability. 
We talked about Minister from Romania,  

we talked about you don't want to be able to turn 
on the light just when the sun is shining or the  

wind is blowing, you want to have it all the time. 
We want to have stability when it comes to energy.  

And renewable energy which was once viewed as 
a challenge to the supply has become a driver  

of diversification and energy security. 
And more is the opposite of stability  

in every possible way. And when it comes to energy 
supply. The idea of renewable energy being a  

driver of energy independence. And therefore 
a driver of security has suddenly taken on  

a much more immediate importance. 
We are in extraordinary times.
 

How do you see this playing out in 
the next weeks and in the next months?  

You would like to start off 
with the minister from Romania.
 

Yes, we have to face the short-term 
challenges that I say. And  

renewables is the answer to -- on the 
medium-term. Not on the short-term. Also,  

nuclear is the answer on the medium or long-term, 
not on the short-term. On the short-term, yes. We  

have to -- we have to get away from the dependency 
on resources. We talk about oil, we talk about  

gas. Oil and gas. So, we have to find to work 
together and to find other solutions of supply  

diversification as a source of supply. And also of 
the supply chain. And we are all mentioned here.  

LNG from Qatar, from South Arabia, from United 
States, from Egypt, from Israel. From all other  

sources from countries that are not working 
with gas like a political weapon. And also  

from Azerbaijan through gas pipelines. Algeria, 
as my colleagues from Italy and North Africa. So,  

we have to work together at the European level.
And I salute the last meeting of the European  

Council to have a common platform of buying 
gas. It's voluntary at the beginning. But  

I think together we can perform better. We 
can find gas for all of us better and also  

for Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova. And 
the war in Ukraine I think give us a lesson that  

we cannot afford to trust people that don't 
keep their words. And we saw now, because  

before starting the war, we saw that most, they 
won't invade Ukraine, they won't do anything. They  

won't change -- now they invade Ukraine and they 
want to change contract. So, we have to face also  

these challenges and to rely on partners that are 
really reliable. And at that level we have to be  

more united than ever together with the United 
States and through all democrat you can countries  

to make a common front to fight with 
this. With these challenges. Thank you.
 

Thank you very much, Minister. Now 
turning to Italy's perspective.
 

Yes, and on the perspective of next months, 
you think COP 27 and G20 would be important for  

where to try to coordinate any kind of initiative 
in order to strengthen the partnerships between  

countries like me. Countries that would 
like to increase their independence from the  

fossil fuels and in general we spoke about Russia. 
But about the blackmails, the energy blackmails.
 

I think that in particular, as Europe, as 
European continent and not only as European Union,  

we need this energy work with Africa. Probably 
hydrogen would be one of the sources that we will  

use during next years, next decades. And it's 
clear that it's impossible for us to produce  

all the hydrogen that we need here on the European 
continent. So, probably we will work with hydrogen  

with the solar energy and wind energy in Africa. 
So, the stability of the African continent,  

the foreign affairs policy of the European Union 
about the southern flank of European, the southern  

border of European Union will be crucial.
The partnerships that we are establishing  

between European Union and 
crucial countries of the African  

continent, it will be very important not only 
for the people there that are our priority,  

but even for the future of our energy plan. And if 
I may as international community we are a little  

bit in late about this kind of dynamics. And 
it's clear. We are in extraordinary time now.  

And even Italy's in the mode about the gas and the 
situation of the requests of payments in rubles  

from the Russian side is unacceptable. And 
probably we will see next weeks, days, months,  

other problems about this energy crisis. 
For this reason, you think that we have to  

accelerate all these aspects on the multilateral 
side. And the last thing is, on the national side,  

in Italy, main enemy of the renewable 
energies is the bureaucratic system.
 

We are fighting against. In order even 
to spending time all the funds that we  

received for the recovery plan and the next 
generation. We are in turn respecting all  

the milestones. But it's clear that we are 
approving all the special decreases against  

the bureaucratic procedures. Because we are the 
first enemy of our renewable energies plan.
 

Thank you so very much, Minister di Maio. 
Bureaucracy almost always hard to get over.  

And you said, you know, okay we're a little 
bit late to the party. I think it's better late  

than never. I would like to turn now to 
you, State Secretary Revaz of Switzerland.
 

I think for the next days and weeks, all are 
available. And all countries are preparing  

in this difficult situation different measures 
to ensure that. But the main challenge is still  

coming. And is the next winter. And we have to 
start now with the measure in order to reveal the  

storage, the gas storages. And it's a European 
issue. And in order to be ready for next wasn't  

and to reduce the dependency we actually do have.
Absolutely. I would like to go to our virtual  

guests now, starting with Dorte Fouquet. 
How do you see the next weeks and months?
 

Tough weeks. But much tougher for the 
Ukrainians than for us. Because we still have  

a maneuver and we are not fighting at the 
moment for our life. That is one thing. What  

I would like to say is also which has not been 
touched upon in this roundtable. The citizens'  

angle with an energy transition. It started 
with citizens in Denmark and German and  

Spain and Italy in the past. Citizens have been 
put in the center of the fit for 55 package  

on our pathway to decarbonization by 2050. And 
that has to be enforced in many member states.
 

So, the beauty of renewable supply tapped by 
cooperatives, by citizen energy projects has to  

be enforced even more. What the Italian Minister 
just said is completely correct. Obstacles in  

planning and permitting. Even when you have a 
new -- a new building block designed in the city,  

there are many good examples that it is forbidden 
that you get gas through the settlements. But that  

they have to be with geothermal or with whatever 
renewable sources. But they cannot use fossil gas  

in that system. And that's a very good advantage.
And so, the permitting is even the law,  

the regional and local laws. What do I do in the 
housing sector which are important? And then comes  

the permitting stage where this things can be 
facilitated, such as not undergoing optioning when  

you want to have access to some funding while you 
roll out citizen energy projects, for example.
 

Thank you very much, Dr. Fouquet. I would 
like to turn now to Rina Bohle Zeller,  

how do you see the next weeks and months?
Depending on the challenges. If you look from  

the manufacturer's perspective, the challenges 
in the next months to secure enough materials  

to get transportation in order to -- it's 
costs that still allow for profitability.  

When it comes to renewables in general, I think 
it would have been very much important to work on  

removing all these red tape that Minister di 
Maio just referred to. To ease permitting to  

build up the pipeline that is allowing 
for net zero compatible growth way.  

And then when it comes for society, what I fail to 
understand personally is that there are so little  

emphasis also from the side of the policymakers 
to call for increased energy efficiency.
 

The IEA has let out several 10-point plans, 
how to use gas dependence, how to reduce  

oil dependence. And there's a lot on energy 
efficiency which could offer immediate relief and  

you would like to see these calls being called up 
much more prominently in the next weeks to come.
 

Thank you very much. Also talking directly to our 
Ministers here about that report from IEA. So,  

we've had an exciting discussion this morning. 
And as we've learned, didn't societal challenges,  

policies, and then, of course, we have red tape 
and bureaucracy. A lot that we have standing  

in our way. What can we do to work together 
towards the goal that we all have in common?  

Namely, climate neutrality. Minister di Maio.
I think that unfortunately the terrible crisis  

like the Ukrainian crisis may be a terrible. 
If I may opportunity. In order to accelerate  

all the processes that we are making and we made 
during the last years. In a way, European Union  

accelerated about the European Defense System 
after the Afghanistan crisis last summer. Now  

we are leading this energy crisis. And probably we 
will accelerate the process about interconnectors.  

But it's not only European Union deal. It's a 
European deal of the European continent. And  

we have to accelerate the interconnections. The 
LNG terminals. It's crazy because we have some  

countries on the western side. They have 
the spare capacity in the LNG terminals  

of 60%. But there are not interconnectors to give 
the gas to other countries. And we are buying  

other LNG terminals on the ships, the offshore 
LNG terminals in order to face this crisis.
 

But I'm optimistic in this terrible crisis 
for Ukrainian people that are suffering  

more than other people, I'm optimistic 
only because I know that the European Union  

make an evolution crisis-by-crisis. And I know 
that it's not good. But we have to use this  

terrible crisis in order to develop new policies 
against the dependence that we have from  

geopolitical actors. And at the same time, 
about the energy transition. It's clear,  

I mentioned COP27, I mentioned the G20. We had 
the presidency last year of the G20. And we  

approved the final conclusion about the target of 
2050. With the carbon neutrality around 2050. You  

remember this word. I -- we pushed it for together 
with our countries together for the 2050 stop. Not  

around 2050. But the next step is continue to push 
in the direction of the carbon neutrality on 2050.  

At the same time about COP27 we have to create 
the conditions even in order to balance the new  

emissions that we will have because of the current 
crisis. We will increase the production with  

coal. We will increase the production with gas.
So, we have to balance these emissions with some  

initiatives that have to 
balance these emission. So,  

we have a lot of things to do. But we are 
together. And this is better than alone.
 

Absolutely. Together is better than alone. 
And I'm really happy that you brought this up.  

One of the things that is so exciting for me as a 
moderator is when I see one panelist say something  

and the other panelists are all nodding along. And 
I want to give you all a chance to say something.  

Next to Minister Popescu. You were nodding along.
Yes, I am gonna agree with my colleague.  

Inter-connectivity is crucial. To raise the level 
of inter-connectivity in this crisis is crucial.  

We have to work together. We cannot alone. So, 
we have to work together at the European level,  

at the regional level and also, you know, in order 
to increase the supply with natural gas at LNG,  

we have to work at the global level. 
So, and we have to work together.
 

And we have to be -- we have to -- to 
transform this crisis in an opportunity. And  

inter-connectivity in gas, it's one thing. 
It's a good thing. But also inter-connectivity  

of the electric system. And we saw how we did in 
one month -- in one week the inter-connectivity  

between Ukraine, Moldova and Europe. We did it 
in one week. 10 days. It was meant to be done in  

6 months. The beginning of next year.
So, if we work together and we work  

together this inter-connectivity, we 
succeed. And we succeed to synchronize  

the electric system of Ukraine, Moldova and 
Europe in amazing 10 days. Like in pandemic,  

we work -- we learn that we move our work, we 
move our meeting online. We develop new services.  

At the same time in this crisis, we have to 
work together and we have to transform it in  

an opportunity. And working together I'm sure that 
we'll find also opportunity for all of us. This is  

-- this I think is a main -- the main challenge to 
work together and to solve all problems together.
 

Absolutely. Working together. It is the biggest 
challenge that we've had. But as you said, we  

can do it. Maybe it takes a crisis, but we can do 
it. State Secretary Revaz, please, Switzerland.
 

We all have our own constraints, national 
constraints. And all countries also have  

champions in the private sector. And we can better 
mobilize the private sectors, private investors to  

start with the big infrastructure projects 
we do need to decarbonization and to increase  

the supply -- security of supply.
And they are waiting for proper signals from  

the governments. That's our task today.
We've heard this multiple times where  

corporations are private companies are 
waiting for signs from governments.  

I was saying earlier today, I feel like it's a 
bit like we're all at a German nightclub. They  

don't start dancing until around midnight. You 
have to wait. I think it's time to start dance,  

ladies and gentlemen of the panel. Before we 
get to our dance, we're gonna head online to  

talk to Dr. Fouquet of ER EF who is going to 
tell us her final statements for the day.
 

Very brief. I'm happy we had this roundtable. 
And we would love, what Minister di Maio said,  

he said it all. We would love to have not words, 
but deeds, good action plans, short-term action.  

The beauty of renewables and the willingness of 
citizens to do much more and for efficiency is  

recognized and is also honored in a way. I hope 
next year we will have a much more renewable  

Europe. And I really wish this unity that 
came up in the European Union as Minister di  

Maio came out of the terrible momentum, that we 
keep on with this unity and the system change.
 

Thank you so much, Dr. Fouquet. To wrap things 
up for us, Rina Bohle Zeller. Oh, I'm not sure,  

is our final guest still with us online. I'll 
wait for a moment. Unfortunately our final guest,  

I think our connection has disappeared. So, 
I want to take this opportunity to thank my  

panelists here and digitally -- I can't thank 
you yet. She's back joining us online. Some final  

comments from Rina Bohle Zeller. Welcome back.
Sorry. There must have been some connection  

issues. I would call for anybody to change the 
approach whether it comes to take decisions. Right  

now we are very much looking into how to minimize 
costs. But we should -- or would get a much better  

outcome if we try with policies, investment 
decisions. Try to seek the solution that is  

going to maximize the societal or planetary return 
on investment. How can we maximize system benefits  

while minimizing all kind of negative impacts? 
This is something economists have been calling  

for centuries. Internalizing externalities. But 
somehow this non-catchy wording was never really  

taken up. And I firmly believe that accelerating 
the energy transition will bring higher value  

than keeping the current fossil fuel-based 
system. And also bring higher energy security.
 

Absolutely. Thank you so very much, Rina 
Bohle Zeller. Now thank you to my incredible  

panelists. Thank you for joining me. This 
is a pleasure and a fantastic way to wrap up  

our first -- our second session of the 
morning mere in the Europasaal. Once again,  

Minister Luigi di Maio, Minister of Foreign 
Affairs and International Cooperation in Italy.  

Virgil-Daniel Popescu, Romania, Benoit Revaz, 
State Secretary, Swiss federal office of energy.  

Joining online, Professor Dorte Fouquet, the 
Director of the European Renewable Energies  

Federation and Rina Bohle Zeller. Senior 
Specialist Global Public Affairs, Vestas. 


