While the worldwide ramp up of renewable energy 
is gonna create jobs up and down the value chain  

and has the potential to provide sustainable 
economic growth, there is an acute shortage  

of labor in the sector, particularly in 
markets that are going to grow exponentially.  

We heard it yesterday and today, certification 
is key. The session that we have right now is  

going to look at how countries and institutions 
can fill that gap with vocational training,  

syllabi, training of trainers, use of remote 
and onsite learning. I'm going to make the  

introductions short, which is an important 
topic I want to get into what we have today.  

On the left of your screen, joined by Dr. Kristina 
Celic, the Director General at Directorate  

for Energy, Ministry of Economy and Sustainable 
Development in Croatia. She holds a doctorate in  

the technical sciences in the field of electrical 
engineering, more than 33 years of experience.  

Joining online is Stephen Byabato. And 
Deputy Minister of Energy in Tanzania.  

Holds a Master's degree and a post-graduate degree 
at the law school of Tanzania. Hello, welcome.
 

Next, joining us again in our 
Europasaal is Dr. Rabia Ferroukhi,  

an international economic development 
expert dedicated to sustainable energy and  

socio-economic development. Currently the director 
of the Director of Knowledge, policy and finance  

center at IRENA. And next is Berthold Breid, 
Renata at RENAC. N Germany. Building capacity  

on green energy technologies. Welcome. And right 
next to me is Ranisha Basnet . With energypedia,  

a nonprofit, with them since the founding days. 
And more than 7 years of experience. And research  

lies in knowledge management and communications. 
This is an incredible panel we have assembled  

this morning. I want to get right into it.
This is the part where I have to be a little bit  

stern with you all and say we have so much 
to get through today. I'm gonna ask you for  

the first round of questions. You have about 2 
minutes to respond. And thank you so very much.  

I would like to start off with our first two 
ministers on the panel, Dr. Celic and Mr. Byabato.  

Why is there a shortage of skilled 
workers in the renewable energy sectors  

in your countries? Start with you, Dr. Celic.
Thank you very much. I would like to underline  

that Croatia is known for the quality 
higher education system. It allows us  

to have in 2007 the -- our strategy and 
the return to renewable energy sources and  

sustainable development. And it helps 
us to be on this part until today. And  

to manage to have the different technologies 
in our countries such as sun, such as hydro,  

such as wind. Also, geothermal energy utilization. 
So, this is very important to know to need to have  

really good basis on the dedication 
to achieve the energy transition.
 

And to have the good place strategies and to 
use our sources. This is important for us to  

know how to use and how to perform different 
technologies in energy sector and to use it.  

And this we need to -- for this we need 
to have good skill and education system  

and skill workers. So, we heard today a just 
transition. A just transition means also to use  

knowledge that we have and to transform 
that knowledge to new technologies.  

To emerge the use of these technologies. So, in 
Croatia, we are connected our legislation, our  

regulatory framework, administration 
bodies with faculties and we are online  

each day, I could say, to manage this transition 
to see what the best options are. And how we  

could -- from the elementary school speak 
about energy. Speak about sustainable  

development then through higher education and the 
faculties at the universities. Put this in the  

frame how we will act on the -- some project. 
Because learning is -- is the best to learn  

on the projects how to develop projects. How 
to develop facilities? And how to maintain it?
 

So, this is the procedure. And also, we need to 
know where to put this new facilities. Renewable  

sources. what our spatial plans need to have. So, 
this is a really big job to do and it needs to  

be -- to connect all those stakeholders and first 
of that you need to have the clear strategy that  

you want to perform renewable energy sources.
Absolutely. This clear strategy is vitally  

important. We're gonna come back to the 
question of strategy later in the panel.  

I would like to go now to our virtual 
panelist, Minister Byabato of Tanzania.  

If you could speak about the shortage of skilled 
workers in the renewable energy in your country.
 

Thank you, moderator. Can you hear me?
I can hear you, yes.
 

Thank you. Back home in Tanzania, we are doing 
just a great job in the ministry of energy. We are  

not so much far. We are not so much behind. But 
we are struggling to make sure renewable energy  

has expert and provide a quantity which may add 
up to the already storage capacity in our country.  

As of now, we are still lagging behind. And 
as you know, we consider this a big hydro. As  

not renewable energy as such. But we 
have a little bit of renewable energy  

in -- below 10 mega hertz of energy and we 
have around 50% of what we have into hydro. But  

as of now, we do not have anything coming 
out of wind. We get something from solar, not  

insignificant. So, we can say we are still very, 
very far behind in renewable energy sources.
 

So, that being the case, for instance, we have 
like a 1700 something-megahertz storage capacity.  

We have something like 10 to 15% 
of it being from renewable energy.  

So, we are still having a big work to do. And from 
what we started generating our own electricity,  

we used to do what we had with water as hydro. 
And natural gas. We produced from fuel. So,  

we did not invest much into the technology of 
renewable energy as a wind and solar and water.
 

So, we still have work to do. We are now going 
to the energy mix so that we can make sure we  

attain what we have to attain with others 
who are aligning -- who are in front of  

us in this fight to achieve renewable energy. 
That being the case, we have not sufficiently  

done with technological transfer. 
Technological imparting it to our people.  

We still have work to do to make sure we bridge 
that gap of people and technocrats and specialists  

into internal -- into renewable energy.
Absolutely. bridging that gap is  

one of the big themes out of yesterday. We 
will come back to you. Now to the studio  

to ask you underlying reasons for the shortage of 
skilled workers in the renewable energy sectors  

in the different countries where you're all 
active. Start with you, please, Dr. Ferroukhi.
 

Thank you for having me, Jennifer. Three points 
I'm going to make. We now have countries with  

ambitious technological targets. There's, 
a technology-centric approach top energy  

transition. And the measures and the policies 
required to skill up the educational and skilling  

policies have not necessarily followed up. So, 
just, for example, just in renewable energy,  

we estimate every year the number of workers 
in the labor force of renewable -- the  

renewable energy sector were 12 million. 
We estimate that we want to go to the 1.5,  

in the next decade, just renewable energy, we'll 
employee about 38 million people. So, that means  

that we need to start scaling the workforce.
Not only that, that's just renewable and  

there's also the energy transition-related jobs. 
That's energy, bar grids, energy flexibility,  

et cetera. Where we expect in the next 
decade to go up from about 16 million to  

over 70 million. So, that's one point. So, 
obviously, we need to rapidly scale up the -- and  

train -- education and train people in order 
to prepare them for the future energy sector.  

And to match the skill and supply 
-- the skilled supply and demand  

what is really important, and I think we're 
still not there in terms of planning, is to  

make sure that we have an integrated approach 
between energy, labor, and education.
 

The second point is that the sector is evolving 
very rapidly. And education and training  

systems are really lagging behind. 
So, the fact is that we don't need,  

for example, skills in only in the power sector, 
but we need them in the heating and cooling.  

We need them for electric vehicles. So, 
that's manufacturing, infrastructure,  

digitalization, access. I mean, there's a lot 
of direct but also indirect job requirements  

that will -- will increase the skills 
needs. And finally, the last point,  

about the fact that we're really not tapping into 
the full potential of the talent pool that we  

have. And this is why I think a lot of interest 
is increasing in the inclusive transition.
 

Just to give you an example --
I want to come back to the examples.  

I want to make sure the other panelists have the 
opportunity. This is the challenge of the panel,  

I know there's a lot to discuss. But right now, 
I would like to come to Mr. Breid from RENAC.  

Tell us about the skills where you're active.
Thank you. I would like to add on to what Rabia  

said. From our observation, the problem is 
oftentimes there is many countries with quite  

high ambitions concerning embassies and so on. 
But oftentimes, it really lacks a strategy. How  

to build up the training landscape in the country. 
So, it's -- maybe there's like some universities  

doing something for the engineers. But then 
economists have forgotten lawyers, to transfer the  

knowledge that is necessary for the development 
of the technologies in the faculties. Or  

technical vocational training is forgotten 
in some branches. So, what is really often  

times missing is a national strategy to build 
up skills according to job profiles required.  

Four different sectors on different 
levels along the value chain.
 

So, what we oftentimes observe is it's 
punctually there's something, but the  

whole strategy is missing. This is the first 
point. The second point is that we also observe  

oftentimes it's the ministry of energy who has the 
obligation to fulfill the targets and so on. But  

skill development is in a responsibility of the 
ministry of higher education and the ministry of  

vocational training or in the ministry of industry 
and commerce. And mostly these ministries are not  

working together to really define a national 
strategy. This is -- I mean, this is -- yeah.  

I think a big message from this BETD also too many 
nations, please, if you want to really reach your  

targets, invite all the ministries on one table 
and develop a strategy for the skill development.
 

National strategy. You have 
said it a couple of times. Yes,  

I think this is one of the big takeaways 
from the BETD. Miss Basnet, your thoughts.
 

Thank you so much. What the other panelists 
already shared, we work on knowledge management  

in the global south. And we see four 
As that contribute to your question.  

Access, is the resources and the knowledge we 
require to train and have skilled manpower,  

is it available? Is the training available, is 
it affordable? Applicability. Is it applicable to  

that particular setting? Is it comprising both the 
academic and the practical knowledge which always  

is -- we see lacking as either too academic or too 
vocational. Do we combine both of the streams?
 

And also, do we actually concentrate on the 
local capacity building? Because if you don't  

have the local capacity building, the project is 
not sustainable. That's the core of it. We see  

the four As. And one also is availability for 
the target audience that you are targeting. If  

we could focus on four As, whatever resources and 
skills we are trying to build. Make it accessible,  

affordable, applicable, in that particular 
settings, that would be like wonderful for  

the renewable energy sector. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Miss Basnet. The same  

question for each of you again. You spoke about 
this for a moment. But I want to dive deeper. On  

what educational level is it problematic, on the 
academic level? And what are some of the obstacles  

looking for the ministers, and start with you, 
face in your country or the institutions that  

you see on a different scale? I would 
like to start with you, Dr. Celic.
 

I will say that it is -- and higher education 
level. Academic level is -- they have their  

role and they are doing that well. And new 
technology. But we need a wide range of  

skills in this higher education and craftsman. And 
also to connect that with the digital transition.  

So, this is a more challenging topic now in 
I think education world. How to -- because  

when we speak about our strategy, it is, 
you know, our energy strategy shows the  

way. Renewable energy transition. And one of 
the measures that is included here to educate  

people to have skilled workers on the sites you 
know? And what the transition brings to us?
 

Different and distributed production 
of electricity. Particularly and  

also heat energy. Corrected with some 
technologies like biomass, thermal.  

So, what do we need? We need a wide range of 
technical skills and also we need the wide  

range of, you know, dispersive activities on the 
different sides on the islands, on the mainlands,  

on the, you know, those parts of the -- we heard 
that a lot of people do not have electricity  

right now. That problem of cooking on the -- on 
environmental friendly and not healthy way. So,  

this is the challenge that we are facing.
This is the challenge that we're facing. We  

talked a bit about that last night. We're 
focusing a lot on challenges. We'll get to  

the good things in just a second, but 
first to Minister Byabato of Tanzania.  

What are some of the problems faced in Tanzania?
The major problem we have is part of the  

technician and the -- those people will need 
much to be in the field and do this and do that  

at all the time. We are not in a position to have 
a so much many specialists because we do not have  

a large quantity of renewable energy stored 
into our area. So, we need to have those  

more technicians, more artisans, more technical 
level at the lowest grade so we can make sure  

all of our time, as the fellow Minister said, they 
can access everyone and offer the services needed.  

Do this and that to make sure renewable energy 
is in place all the time. And being innovative  

to have a new thing out of what we have for now.
So, at level is we speak with I hope  

we are ready for now. And make sure we produce 
this at all levels so that you can bridge the gap  

and make sure we have everything.
We're gonna talk about that in  

just a second. You're right. Now I 
would like to come back to the room.  

Dr. Ferroukhi, where do you see the problems?
I'm gonna focus on renewable energy. We looked  

at the segments of the value chain and 
try to identify what kind of skills and  

occupational backgrounds are required. What is 
interesting is we found about 30% are mathematics.  

And then lawyers and regulators. But what's 
interesting is the majority of the skills  

required do not necessarily need a university 
degree. This is where obviously the necessary  

skills can be brought for alternative pathways 
and you have spoken about vocational training,  

apprenticeship, on the job training, et cetera. 
The challenges are different at different levels  

of training. At higher education, the main problem 
is they lag behind, usually slow at bringing  

new materials into the curricula or create new 
courses. And vocational training which is much  

more agile and flexible. One of the issues we have 
is when there is no regulation. So, for example,  

if you have no regulation in the vocational 
training system, then you can have a solar PEV  

installation program that is done without any kind 
of standards. But many countries just mention by  

the deputy minister in Tanzania but also 
in Kenya are also integrating that in the  

regulatory framework so there are standards.
That's one example. But maybe just to finish,  

in the energy access context I think what is very, 
very important is that the skill building be also  

accompanied with local project development. 
And there are many examples which I'm sure my  

colleagues are gonna speak about.
Fantastic. I want to get right to  

those colleagues. Mr. Breid from RENAC.
Oftentimes what's missing is often the  

practical aspects of the trainings, yeah? So, in 
universities but also in the technical training,  

emphasis is missing. People 
are skilled in photovoltaics  

and never built the systems and connected 
to the grid or put it into operation. And  

so, this is -- yes. I mean, formal, they have some 
kind of certificate or they passed the exam. But  

the practical aspect is something which is really 
missing. And I mean, yeah. The point that Rabia  

pointed out to have this combination with project 
developers in reality is really a good approach.
 

And another thing is also we observe oftentimes 
companies, they are doing training on the job  

for the technical level installation, 
operation, maintenance. On the one hand side,  

maybe because there is no training facilities. 
And opportunities to send stuff for training.  

But yet it is also the perception that they save 
money. They don't want to spend money on training.  

And this is a big problem in general about like 
skill development in the energy sector, yeah?
 

Many expect that -- I mean, there's Internet 
so, sending people to go to the Internet and  

reading something is enough for training. This 
is not the case. I mean, you could just like buy  

1,000 books and distribute it in a country and 
ask people to read them. But this does not mean  

they really digest it and know what they should 
have learned. So, this is really the difference.  

And this perception oftentimes to save a bit 
of costs for training, yeah? This calculation  

is not really -- is not really practical.
There is a lot about this learning by doing  

aspect. But the importance like part of that vital 
training is to get in there and then actually  

to be doing it. And to be trained on before you 
are deployed to do it out sort of in real life.  

I saw your colleague next to you, Miss 
Basnet nodding along. Tell us, please.
 

No, I actually agree with everything my 
panelists said and summarized everything.  

I would like to add, along with the practical 
on hands training, we need to work between  

the practitioners. I learned how to do it, 
but when I went to the field, oh, my god,  

many of the indicators that I learned in my 
studies, they don't apply. I need someone  

who has done it before to give his or her 
input. Those are the exchange also missing.  

And also bring one complete new point in the 
agenda. As we move towards energy transition,  

we are moving from pure renewable energy to more 
Nexus. Talking about energy and agriculture,  

energy and water. That means we are 
also merging two specializations.
 

And that's going to be -- because we see more 
and more demand for knowledge in this seconder,  

that's a huge topic that will come up that we will 
need more and more skilled manpower by the two who  

we can then train to merge into one or some course 
that kind of helps us to produce manpower who can  

work in Nexus topics. Because those are going to 
be the new challenges in the sector. Thank you.
 

Thank you very much. We looked at some challenges. 
And in some ways, it's lovely that there's  

agreement where the challenges lie. But I want 
to look forward by looking back. What has worked  

well so far. What has been some strategies that 
you've said, okay. In terms of skill development,  

this is something that we've seen working. I would 
like to start with your perspective from Croatia.
 

What is working. We have realized a lot of 
projects in the last 15 years when we started  

with our strategy on renewable energy sources. 
So, we built a lot of new facilities. One fifth of  

whole installed capacities in electric sector we 
have nowadays from renewable sun, wind, biomass,  

geothermal. So, learning by doing is the right 
world -- word and the right way how to achieve  

this targets having a good working -- good and 
skilled workers. And we managed to do that,  

yes. We implement maybe different technologies 
abroad. Not -- we do not produce all of them.  

Some. But nowadays we have skilled 
workers on these different areas.
 

Also, we transform those who are working in this 
mining industry, hydrocarbon industry. And they  

now are in the -- they are focused on geothermal 
energy. So, this is how also this transition  

works. From the other side, we have also industry 
-- very powerful industry producing generators and  

motors for hydro -- hydro power plants. Also, 
they turn to wind industry, for example. This  

is how it works. And how it works well. So, this 
is our experience and now, for example, we are  

starting with hydrogen. Last week we adopted 
Croatia hydrogen strategy. And this will speed  

also the process. So, you need to be dedicated to 
-- and focused to your targets to manage them.
 

Thank you very much. I would also like to get 
the perspective from Tanzania. Minister Byabato.
 

Yes. For us what we see has worked for us in 
the past is to have those exchange programs of  

making sure our people down here comes to you, for 
instance. We have had several exchange programs  

with the Germans. And we are getting some other 
skilled labor from other areas to come in and  

input some knowledge to us. That is one of what 
we do. The second thing we do, we have some hydro  

projects down here going on. We make sure in every 
hydro project we have a simulation center for  

making sure that these people who are there adjust 
practically and acquire knowledge of what they can  

do. And we are now scheduling the exchange program 
in further technological studies so that we can go  

into what the Minister has been saying from 
Croatia. Going to geothermal. Going, extending  

to biomass and some other renewable energies 
so that we can be in a position of having --
 

Oh, I think our connection may 
have just -- yes, I think the --
 

You lost me?
We lost you, but  

you're back. We will give you 
another second to wrap up.
 

Make sure we don't stop this program and make sure 
when ending up what do we do with the application  

back home? So, we can make sure we have excellent 
programs to advance knowledge of what we have and  

go back into the renewable energy sources 
to make sure we have everything we want.
 

Thank you very much for that perspective from 
Tanzania. I would like to bring it back now  

into the studio. Dr. Ferroukhi from IRENA, what's 
been working well that you have seen? And why?
 

I think we have to be -- of the fact that 
the energy transition will bring challenges.  

Educational nature that we spoke about. I think if 
we look at that from the outset, we are bound to  

have solutions and plan for them. For example you 
ever very often project developments outside urban  

centers when the skills are concentrated in urban 
centers. Bring those training centers as close as  

possible to where the potential is. This is what 
happened in Morocco. You have three training  

centers put close by the project development 
and that has worked quite well. That's just to  

give you an example. I would like to make one more 
point. That's the fact that we are talking about  

how to exchange best practices, et cetera.
And I think that's essential because we have  

seen a lot of successful examples. And IRENA 
is actually launching a new global platform  

on education for the energy transition together 
with UNESCO and other institutions. And in that,  

the main point here is to bring all the 
different stakeholders between industry,  

project developers, governments, et cetera. And to 
basically share best practice and at the same time  

the first thing that we will be doing actually, 
and I think that's another thing that is needed  

not only globally, but obviously at the national 
level because it will be much more accurate  

which is a skills survey that is aimed at 
employers in order to better identify, actually,  

the specific needs of the sector. Thank you.
Thank you very much. It's always exciting for  

me to get to host a panel like this to see how 
fellow panelists pull out their pens and start  

writing something. I want to go to you, I saw 
you pick up your pencil and make a note. Please.
 

Some things are working well. 
But in the skill sector,  

as I mentioned already, practical 
oriented trainings are key.  

The second thing is the trainings should really 
focus and relate to the specific job profiles.  

It doesn't make sense to train people in something 
they will not work in. Which oftentimes happens.  

So, you can save a lot of time, resources, 
energy, and money if you really focus to what  

the target group needs to learn.
Also, we observed that if you build up the  

trainings with an exam and a certification, this 
helps a lot. So, I mean, then it's also comparable  

and clear what participants will learn. And also, 
I mean, they will use this for their personal  

development. And also, we noticed what is working 
well is this concept of planning -- planned  

learning that we use a lot. So, oftentimes we 
combine a lot of online training which can be done  

whenever participants can or have time together 
then with later face-to-face training, yeah?
 

So, with this kind of package, 
this is quite economic.
 

And I can imagine that the pandemic over the 
last 2 years has sort of brought this blended  

learning style. We realize that there are 
ways to do that there weren't pre-pandemic.
 

Yes.
To wrap it up, miss #Basnet, what and it why?
 

Like as was pointed out with the local 
practitioner training. In Southeast Asia,  

the sector. In the 1980s, lots of trainings 
and resources were done to build up the capital  

city such that you look at it now, there's a 
vibrant hydro chain with trainings in the region  

and there are continuous exchanges between 
practitioners not only from the region,  

but across different continents and 
coming up with new collaboration ideas,  

new technologies and so on. So, definitely a local 
capacity building. That is the key if you want to  

achieve energy transition. And second, to build 
what Ben had already mentioned about exchanges.
 

We have seen it again and again. Just having a 
bunch of experts in the room, whether it's online,  

onsite. And let them talk. So much good 
comes out in the room. There is so much  

exchange of ideas, collaborations, interregional, 
intercountry, again, you name it. So, really,  

if we focus on local capacity building, practical 
actions, I think those are the two ones that in  

our experience we see working really well.
Thank you so much for that. I have to say,  

you have been a fantastic panelist. I want to 
keep going. We have got two more questions to  

get through. Start again with our Ministers. Is 
there a plan that your respective governments  

has for the development of specialized workers 
in the region -- renewable energy sector? Do you  

have any up-skilling measures that specifically 
benefit global phase out of coal and therefore  

decarbonization through renewable energies. Limit 
your responses to 2 minutes. Start with Croatia
 

Yeah, we have a smart education strategy. And 
why it's important to have this word "Smart."  

Because we heard also here that we need different 
kind of activities. Agriculture, transport,  

different sectors when we apply to energy and 
where we use energy. In civil engineering. We need  

good planning for doing that. So, education and 
train of people who will carry this development  

of green transition is most important 
in these days. And we need to start  

even on the receipt -- research level. Also on 
this commercialization of -- that means that  

we need -- we need to connect also different 
segments, different sectors and to have  

really skilled and smart working force.
This is -- this is why not to focus to only  

one segment, but to broaden it and to have a 
basis -- first to have a basis of what's going on  

in the transition? What are the segments that you 
need at the, you know, base knowledge? And then  

to apply on some segments and I will -- I will 
support this thing that it is very important to  

have face-to-face trainings. Not only 
we are Internet. Because it is -- it  

is how it's -- it is best to share knowledge.
Absolutely it is. I can only support what you saw.  

I would like to go now to the Minister Byabato in 
Tanzania. Does your government has a specific plan  

when it comes to skill development of specialized 
workers in the renewable energy sector?
 

Yeah. Yes. Initially -- 
 

Mr. -- I think we got you back. Yep. You're back.
Yes. I'm saying in renewable energy,  

locally we have the national energy policy 2015. 
We have the policy master plan in 2020 update. And  

we have some other put in place integrations to 
make sure that we do not get left behind when it  

comes to imparting knowledge and the bridging the 
gap in renewable energy. But on top of that one,  

when we want to go globally, now we make sure that 
we should join the international organizations  

from all over the world to make sure that we 
go with the clean energy and cooking energy,  

power and whatever., for instance, we are -- 
we are now joining the sustainable energy for  

all. We are going into the international 
alliance. We are going into international  

renewable energy IRENA. We had them yesterday. 
And carbon sequestration and so on and so forth.
 

So, we can share what others share so that we 
can bring that knowledge back home and share  

the note of making sure that we do not emit a 
lot of carbon and whatever into the air. Yeah.
 

Thank you very much. And thank you for sticking 
with us through these technical difficulties. It's  

great to have you with us here virtually.
No problem.
 

I would like to ask the three panelists left in 
the room. What do you see from your perspectives,  

what are the capacity building pre-conditions 
to developing RE and EE markets? Are there  

educational, or re-educational measures 
that specifically benefit the phase outs  

or decarbonization through -- you're already 
nodding. Go ahead from IRENA, Dr. Ferroukhi.
 

Thank you, Jennifer. I don't know 
how you do it to speak so fast.
 

I'm so sorry.
No, I have told you before  

that the energy transition will bring a lot of 
job creation. That's the good news. Obviously,  

it will outweigh the job losses that we'll have 
in fossil fuels. But that still means that we  

have to take care of the fossil fuel workers 
and we need re-skilling and up-skilling measures  

to accompany the labor market interventions.
Now, the good news is that some of the skills  

are transferable. So, for example, 
the offshore oil and gas industry  

has specialist skills that really could fit 
with the offshore wind industry, for example.  

Another good news is that we have 
seen through different studies that  

some of the -- there are synergies between 
the coal industry and solar PV skills. It is  

estimated that about 40% of coal-fired power plant 
workers could be transitioned into the PV sector.
 

On the other hand, the coal mining industry, about 
30 to 35% of jobs are specific to the industries  

and will require some kind of re-skilling. Very 
important measures that we've seen that works.  

And this is in terms of this transition is to have 
a transition training fund. So, training at large  

scale skills training. This is important. It is 
important to have these funds. We have seen them  

in Spain, for example. In the coal phase out. Nice 
example in the State of Colorado which created a  

bill that has a $15 million provision to assist 
coal-dependent workers and communities in this  

transition. And 7 million of that is actually for 
apprenticeship and training programs for workers.  

But that means you have to have the means 
for that. And I'll talk about that later.
 

We would love to bring that up in the closing 
statements which we will get to after we talk  

to our panelists. Please, Mr. Breid.
Rabia mentioned a lot already.
 

I'm a terrible influence, please.
This is exactly the point I was about to make.  

So, the job which will be lost in the 
coal industry of our coal power plants,  

a lot of them these people -- I mean, they 
are electricians. They are engineers. So,  

they can work in the field of renewable 
energies. Either in solar PV or bio energy.  

A lot of potential is there to really go forward 
working in the renewable energy sector without  

re-skilling. And others need to be re-skilling.
Re-skilling is going to be an incredibly important  

part of this. absolutely agree. You make 
great points. Wrap up for Miss Basnet.
 

First focus on the pre-condition. And tweak 
did a little bit to add local skill level.  

That's the keyword I'm going to add today.  

You can have them on the energy building 
infrastructure. But if you don't have the local  

capacity development, who is going to maintain? 
Who is going to do the after service? Who is  

going to be responsible for the sustainability of 
it? So, really without local capacity building,  

you cannot expect to have a sustainable energy 
infrastructure project in the long-term.
 

So, that's my two thoughts 
on it. Thank you so much.
 

Okay. I'm -- we have lots of time 
left over for your final thoughts.  

We have been too fast all day long. Now we can all 
take a deep breath. I would like to ask for your  

final thoughts before we end the panel. Start, 
of course, with Minister Celic from Croatia.  

Please be sure to use your microphone.
Thank you. Sorry. I would like to say maybe we  

didn't mention funding. For example, our 
energy -- renewable hydrogen strategy  

show -- to establishments of regional 
hydrogen center. For that we need  

also to have human resources. But 
also we need to have -- to equip  

that. And to work and to finance this. This 
was the main question, actually, when we were  

communicating this strategy how to proceed. 
And will only industry and the potential  

investment bring knowledge? Or we need to do that 
parallel. We need to do that in parallel. So,  

this is -- this is just one example of what we 
are doing and how we need to proceed in this green  

hydrogen industry, for example. We have really a 
lot of -- we are looking at the hydrogen -- green  

hydrogen as a new fuel. So, particularly 
important in transport sector. To mention that.
 

But I would like to conclude with one -- just 
one sentence. We have given the ambition goals.  

It is necessary from the earliest stage to teach 
and support young generation to think critically.  

Take in initiatives and respect nature in order 
to gain understanding and skills in the fields of  

environment, sustainability, and climate change.
And the -- for this renewable energy transition,  

energy transition will help to 
do that. And to achieve goals.
 

Absolutely. These are inspiring words. Thank you 
for sharing that with us today, Minister Celic.  

Now to our virtual guest, Deputy Minister of 
Tanzania for his final thoughts on today's panel.  

I think -- I think we might have to come 
back you in just a minute. So, I'll turn  

to the panelists in the room. Dr. Ferroukhi 
from IRENA, your final thoughts on today.
 

Thank you so much, Jennifer. Back to two points 
which I didn't make in the beginning. That we  

tap into the talent pool that we are already have. 
This is why a lot of people are talking about an  

inclusive transition. To look at gender, we did 
look at women in the renewable energy sector.  

32% of women. Which is better than the 
conventional sector, 22% in oil and gas. We  

can do better. But that's one. And we have to look 
at technology-by-technology in the global energy  

sector. When we did the wind sector survey, it 
was 21%. Much closer to the conventional sector.  

Again, this is a STEM issue. Which we found out 
that 28% of women are only in the STEM jobs in  

renewable energy. So, there is a long way to go.
And again, educational policies and measures would  

be essential in order to promote women. But 
other minorities, quote, unquote. We're not  

really a minority. We're 50% of the population. 
But the second point you would like to make,  

it goes back to your point. I fully agree with 
local capacity and building local capacity.  

And this is intimately related to the kind of 
development that we have. And the new classical  

paradigm of economics that we are -- have 
embraced for centuries -- for decades, rather.  

So, the point is that renewable energy 
is great. But we also need to diversify  

our economies -- economies that are, for 
example, commodity-dependent. And we have  

to make sure that the local value is created.
So, for example, it's not just about renewables.  

But it's, for example, a new topic on rare 
Earth materials, for example. Where we go  

and basically take the raw materials and bring 
them to the rest of the world. No, local value  

has to be created. It has to have a benefit for 
local domestic value. Otherwise we're gonna run  

into the same kind of problems with basically a 
producty type of development. A paradigm. Which we  

need to move away. I mean, doing renewables and 
energy transition doesn't mean that everything is  

gonna be rosey for everybody. So, we need from the 
onset to make sure that other economies, economies  

that are dependent today on technology, et cetera, 
from certain regions, have the opportunity to also  

diversify their energy sectors and beyond. And 
take -- along the segments of the value chain  

really create domestic value. Thanks.
Thanks so much. Diversifying, incredibly  

important. And I do want to come back to the first 
point you made about girls. I think you said 28%  

in STEM, exactly. And I think it's important 
to say this. We're talking about re-skilling  

people like me who are working. But we also 
need to be paying attention to education  

much younger. Make sure that 
girls aren't weeded out in high  

school or weeded out when they go study at 
university. We are 52% of the population.  

I'm glad to see our virtual guest is back. 
Back you, Deputy Minister Byabato of Tanzania.
 

Thank you. I'm so sorry this introduction 
of the communication. Finally, and lastly,  

I would wish to say we in Tanzania, and 
I hope many of the African countries,  

are eager to move faster into renewable energy. 
And down here we are looking to make sure that  

when it comes to capacity we have something like 
10% of the full internal capacity of our energy  

into -- coming from renewable energy.
And maybe as I said before,  

we have those initiatives which are in place. 
Making sure that we attain what we have to attain.  

But I should also tell you what we have. We are 
welcoming investors down here to invest into  

renewable energy. We are looking to have somewhere 
in the future a 1,000 Mega watt coming from solar  

and coming from wind and other areas like biomass 
and geothermal. We welcome you. Whoever wishes to  

invest here. The environment is conducive. 
And very, very much favorable for anyone.
 

And to make sure, I assure you it is available. 
The eagle project which was stated about  

yesterday. At least 90% of that pipeline passes 
through Tanzania and it is safe down here.  

And it is a bigger advantage to both of us. 
So, that is what I could say. Thank you.
 

Thank you very much for those 
final words. Back to the studio,  

Mr. Breid from RENAC, your closing statements.
Yeah. Nations should see this not as a burden,  

but also an opportunity. And also reflect on 
the co-benefits of climate mitigation. One  

co-benefit has been mentioned already. Like 
local job creation, local value creation.  

There is a lot, a lot, a lot in it. Especially for 
the renewable and energy efficiency sector. And  

also to what my colleague says, it is so crucial 
to really build up local training infrastructures  

with local trainer pools, with local training 
institutions. It is really not economic to  

send trainers around the world all the time. So, 
and this is possible to really build up this local  

training institutions and also as Rabia mentioned, 
it would be good to reflect on where these skills  

are needed. In which geographical region, yeah? 
So, close to where the investments will be also.
 

And yeah, again, closing remark. I 
think it makes sense that nations,  

meaning different ministries really sit 
together. Okay, what's the co-benefits  

of climate mitigation? What can be achieved in 
our country concerning the local value creation?  

Also, gender aspect and so on. I mean, to really 
have the whole -- yeah -- opportunities to see  

them. And then as a next step, really to decide on 
developing strategies for skills development. On  

different levels, for the different genders. For 
the different professions along the value scale.
 

Thank you so very much for that perspective. 
Our last panelist, final statements,  

please, Miss #Basnet from energypedia.
Thank you. My colleagues adequately summarized  

everything, I will try to add. Especially with 
the local capacity building, now there is a  

lot of resources and training material. But the 
question of affordability is still a big issue.  

As long as those are not affordable, applicable, 
and available to the target audience, we are still  

at a loss. So, really urging everyone to make it 
affordable. Because it needs to be affordable.  

And also, the second thing is because I'm a 
practitioner myself, it's always assumed that  

practitioners exchange happen automatically, 
organically. They will just come together.  

We will exchange. But in real life, it doesn't. 
You need to foster it, you need to nurture it. You  

need to bring a couple of experts in the room. You 
need to provide that environment so that there is  

an exchange. Just the thought that it would happen 
organically, it's more -- so, really let's foster  

more exchange between practitioners. Because 
there's so much of learnings in the sector.  

And every time when we have such kind of events 
where people come together, exchange ideas and,  

you know, bring the experiences, there's so much 
of collaboration happening. So, with really making  

resources available and really focusing and 
fostering exchange between practitioners at  

all level. Online, on-site, thank you.
Thank you. Fostering exchange is what we  

need to do here at the BETD and taken back to 
the practitioners also. Please, Mr. Breid, you  

wanted to say something else and we have time.
Yes, I wanted to add to the question, who pays?
 

Okay.
And we need to see a differentiate between  

education either on like technical level 
or an academic level. And further training,  

yeah? So, what concerning educational 
programs for electricians, for plumbers,  

for whatever -- mechanics. But 
also in the academic level.
 

I think in the very end, for a government, 
it is not so much expensive to just  

modify the syllabus of the study 
programs in the university.  

For the technical and vocational training. 
So, this has to be done once, yes. But I mean,  

it's this kind of like lessons on PV installation. 
For example, they're replacing others, okay?  

In the end, you don't need to have a longer 
program. So, this is just to see, okay.  

What kind of like the old topics that have been 
touched on can be removed? And what can come in?  

So, in the end, it will not be so much more 
costs. Except for having this process.
 

Concerning the further training, there 
is a segment where like people from  

industry, commerce companies could go in and 
pay for it. But again, this is a bit small  

also. And it depends on the possibility. If you 
can really pay for that. So, it depends on the  

country. It depends on the amount of money which 
is available there. And also, for public servants.  

Which play a crucial role, yeah? For giving 
applications of construction for the regulators.  

For I mean, yep. Providing all the different 
services where public sector is involved.
 

There needs to be also the understanding 
that public sector somehow has to invest  

for the training of public sector stuff. This 
is not falling from heaven, yeah? So, again,  

it's a question who pays. In this case, again, 
it's -- it's a public sector. So, coming back to  

private companies or private 
people, participants can pay.  

This is for the further training. But also to 
a limited extent. So, this has to be seen.
 

I think it would be fantastic for all of 
us if money did just fall from the sky.  

Unfortunately that's not the case. The 
idea of funding incredible important.  

We are now out of time. Thank you to the fantastic 
panelists, what a fantastic way to start out  

on day two of the Berlin Energy Transition 
Dialogue. From Croatia, Minister Kristina Celic,  

and virtually, Stephen Byabato, and Rabia 
Ferroukhi, Berthold Breid, and Ranisha  

Basnet. Thank you very much. It has been 
such an honor and such a pleasure to have  

you here with me. We've got a few people 
in the hall. I'm going to go ahead and  

give you a round of applause. You were 
fantastic. Thank you all so very much. 


