I'd like to thank the German government 
for hosting this dialogue and inviting  

Australia to be part of it. The theme for 
this year's forum, from ambition to action,  

resonates with Australia. Last year, I had the 
privilege of sharing with you the practical action  

Australia is taking to reduce our emissions and 
support countries in our region to do the same.  

Since then, we built on our climate ambitions 
by committing to achieve Net Zero by 2050.  

We've also set out a technology?led 
plan for how we'll achieve that target.  

The Australian government is now allocating more 
than $21 billion to low emissions technologies,  

a war chest for the decade to 2030 to drive 
to $126 billion around 80 billion Euros  

of total public and private sector investment. 
Last year, I spoke about the specific price  

tag that Australia had set for five 
priority technologies. Clean hydrogen,  

under $2 a kilogramme. Low emissions materials 
?? low emission steel and aluminium under $700  

and $2,200 per tonne respectively. Carbon 
capture storage ?? and carbon measurement, under  

$3 per hectare per year. We've since added ultra 
low?cost solar to the list at $15 a megawatt hour.  

A 70% reduction on today's cost. We're throwing 
the book at these technologies because we know  

that if we can get their cost to parity with 
existing alternatives, Net Zero Emissions  

will be practically achievable, not just in 
Europe or Australia, but across the globe. 
 

But Australia won't be able to do this alone. It's 
why we want to work with our allies and partners  

including Germany and the European Union to 
make these goals happen. In fact, the Australian  

government has already set aside $565 million for 
bilateral and multilateral partnerships focused  

on these and other new energy technologies. 
Over the past 12 months, we've reached agreements  

with Germany, Japan, Singapore, the UK, the 
Republic of Korea, and most recently, India.  

Using a solar platform for our two countries to 
realize our ambition of a future hydrogen supply  

chain and bilateral trade in clean hydrogen. 
Through initiatives and Germany's H2 Global  

Initiative, we're working to roll out hydrogen R&D 
projects and facilitate long?term hydrogen supply  

from Australia to Germany. Colleagues, 
we are making this a reality today.  

In January this year, the first shipment of liquid 
hydrogen left Australian shores bound for Japan.  

Australia is focused on practical action like this 
so that we can all achieve our climate goals. 
 

That's why we strongly support the Glasgow 
agenda with its focus on accelerating innovation  

to drive down emissions by 2030. Australia looks 
forward to hosting the first?ever Clean Energy  

Supply Chain Summit in June, hoping to build 
a pathway towards achieving decarbonisation.  

We'll also work closely with the G20 
host, Indonesia, to ensure a strong  

focus on practical decarbonisation 
pathways and solutions. Thank you. 


