And I'm back with Oliver Rentschler. He's 
the Director General for climate diplomacy,  

economic affairs, and economic technology here 
at the Federal Foreign Office here in Germany. I  

think you're gonna give us a few first takeaways 
from the first day and a half of the BETD. 
 

I'm happy to do so. Thanks so much, Jennifer. 
I'd start with the BETD as a dialogue platform  

because that is what it was about. This 
is very difficult for the last two years  

when this happened in virtual meetings, but 
now this year we're back in full strength.  

We've seen a packed Weltsaal for the opening 
event. We have seen since multiple encounters.  

We've seen bilateral meetings. We've seen 
partnership agreements signed. So networking  

at its best. This is what BETD is about. And 
I think that would be a first takeaway. 
 

Second, I would speak about the Federal 
Government, the new Federal Government,  

and its commitment to Energiewende 
to make the Energiewende happen.  

And I think that's really manifested through the 
participation of four cabinet minister. We have  

heard three of them already. We're going 
to hear a fourth one in a few moments. 
 

But then I would also say a few words about the 
context in which this BETD edition did take place.  

Of course, the Russian aggression against Ukraine 
was present in many speeches. It was present  

in many discussions and it was on everyone's 
mind. Here again, I think what one could observe  

is one a consternation by really all participants, 
a frustration, indignation about this aggression.  

I think that united all participants. Second, 
there was a feeling this very aggression makes  

the need for energy transition even stronger. 
There is also a very clear security imperative now  

for the energy transition. 
And the third element that in this  

context became obvious, that the consequences of 
this Russian aggression, they're really global.  

We had many participants from all over the world, 
and there's no corner in this world where the  

negative impact of this aggression is not felt. 
And I would say particularly in the Global South,  

there are many countries now struggling with 
the impact. So that would also make us all even  

stronger in our commitment to make the 
transition a just transition. I think  

just transition really in capital letters. 
And speaking about reaching out to the Global  

South, I think we've also seen among the issues 
that were discussed in various panels some  

solutions to the problems that we're facing. And 
I'm speaking here about one particular one which I  

consider the shooting star of this year's edition 
and was Hydrogen, the subject of two dedicated  

panels and provides particular opportunities 
for partners all over the world. Again,  

if we speak about just transition, one 
element that we can count on for the future. 
 

I would then also take away from this first one 
and a half days something that ran across the  

panels like a thread, a common thread, and that is 
the need to combine public and private engagement.  

So, again, here the many encounters that we've 
seen in the margins, in and on the panels is  

let's say a testimony to the fact that it is 
not only needed, but it is also happening. 
 

And finally, although we are not yet 
across the finishing line, I would say  

I can already take away a lot of optimism. No one 
underestimates the challenge, but everyone here,  

everyone that participated, who participated is 
committed, is dedicated, and I think we make this  

motto of this year's edition really come to life. 
From ambition to action. Thank you very much. 
 

Thank you so much, Oliver Rentschler. Those were 
really inspiring words and optimistic words.  

Thank you very much for taking the time to 
be here with us today. Ladies and gentlemen,  

Oliver Rentschler, the Direct General for Climate 
Diplomacy, Economic Affairs, and Technology,  

here at the Federal Foreign Office. Thank 
you so very much for being here today.


