Thank you very much for your very kind 
introduction. And ladies and gentlemen,  

it's really a pleasure to join this really 
excellent event today. I must admit,  

in these days, it's really hard to think 
about much else than the war in the Ukraine,  

and I think it's also really horrible to see the 
tremendous suffering of the Ukrainian people.  

Our thoughts, my thoughts are with them. 
We at BASF, we do what we can to support  

through a multitude of humanitarian activities, 
but also by helping our colleagues in the Ukraine  

to uphold their activities as long as they can. 
At the same time, we are in close alignment with  

the government. Fully standing behind 
their decisions and implementing them.  

We are also looking at the potential 
long term effects of the war.  

Here the redominant question is how do we 
continue on our path to climate neutrality?  

The war will not make the transformation 
towards climate neutrality easier,  

but for BASF, I can clearly say we stick to 
our targets. The transformation must not be  

slowed down by the tremendous challenges we are 
facing. We are committed to continue our path  

towards Net Zero. If anything, the groundwork 
has to be laid even farther ?? faster. So I  

would like to share with you what we are doing 
and how we can speed up our transformation. 
 

Let me check how I can click the clicker 
here for the next slide. I hope it's working.  

Not working? So, please, someone click the 
next slide here. Our corporate purpose is we  

create chemistry for a sustainable future. 
There is no question a sustainable future  

is a climate?neutral future. There will be 
no climate neutrality without chemistry.  

No energy efficient housing, no wind turbines 
and no solar panels without chemicals.  

As an industry, we deliver the products needed 
for a sustainable future, but at the same time,  

it's also our responsibility to produce them 
in a new climate?neutral way. And there is  

another important point, climate protection 
means a sound and stable economic foundation.  

That means only a competitive and strong industry 
can enable a sustainable and prosperous future. 
 

We can see that in many regions across the 
world, climate protection gains speed. However,  

we also see that different regions take different 
approaches. It is clear that energy policy and  

industrial policy are the basis for countries who 
position themselves in the new geoeconomic age.  

Competitive sustainability and sustainable 
competitiveness will decide the power of nations.  

Competitive companies are the pillars for that. As 
a global company, we need to be successful in all  

countries where we produce. Contributing to the 
transformation of these countries and maintaining  

and strengthening sustainable value chains. 
What we don't want is a different regional  

approach that leads to distortions like carbon 
leakage or trade barriers. Because they create  

inefficiencies and waste resources that we need 
for transformation in all countries. At BASF,  

we want to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions for 
our production sides and our energy purchases by  

25% by 2030. Compared to the year 2018. While 
growing production volumes at the same time.  

And of course our target is Net Zero emissions. 
We don't differentiate between regions. There  

is one common approach. We depend on respective 
policy frameworks. We can make quicker progress  

in those countries where the policies are 
conducive to climate?neutral response. 
 

What are the measures? How we want to achieve 
Net Zero? And why is this challenge so huge?  

The answer is quite simple. Chemical processes 
require vast amounts of energy. Like our basic  

industries, like all other basic industries 
such as steel, aluminium, and cement,  

we are at the beginning of basically all the 
value change. So everything that we achieve in  

reducing CO2 footprint brings immediate 
benefit to our downstream customers.  

It is therefore our task and responsibility to 
address this in the value chain. The good news is,  

technically, this is possible. Please, 
could you go to the next slide? 
 

We can't change the fact that chemical production 
requires large amounts of heat and steam. We can't  

do this, obviously. We have done a lot in 
the past to making our processes and energy  

usage more efficient. But now the low?hanging 
fruits have been picked over the last years.  

So to bring us now to the next level, we now need 
to take a decisive step. Replace fossil fuels with  

renewable electricity. In essence, this means 
using electricity from renewable resources for  

our power demand. Chemical production also needs 
a lot of steam. So far produced by gas?based power  

plants. Now we are in the process to pilot the use 
of electric heat pumps to generate CO2?free steam.  

Here in Germany, we want to redeploy waste heat 
from our chemical plants by using electric heat  

pumps on a scale never seen before. 
This requires technological development,  

and we are partnering in the very 
good way with Siemens Energy.  

However, the full electrification of 
chemical production will only be possible  

with completely new production 
processes and technologies.  

Some of these are not available yet. In 2018, 
we have funded the development of new production  

technologies in our own R R&D programme. 
CO2?free hydrogen which we followed two pathways.  

Piloting a water electrolyzing which is planned to 
go into operation at the end of 2024. And we are  

running a test plant for climate?friendly hydrogen 
using a promising technology complimentary  

to the water method. It only needs 1/5 of 
the real power compared to the water. 
 

What is now important to keep in mind that a 
lot of these technologies still need development  

time before we can make use of them on an 
industrial level. And we will also use the  

bio?based feed stocks to reduce emissions by 
increasingly replacing fossil feed stocks.  

All of these levers are supported by the measures 
we are using to implement our CO2 emissions.  

Let me elaborate a bit more on 
one of our most important levers,  

electricity from renewable resources. On 
the next slide, you see transformation of  

the chemistry comes with a major increase in the 
demand for electricity from renewable sources.  

And we need to supply reliably in sufficient 
quantities at all times, day or night.  

And obviously also, globally and competitive 
prices. That is why we are taking renewable energy  

supply into our own hands. We have launched 
several projects, together with partners,  

advancing our own renewable energy assets as well 
as long?term power purchase agreements. I'm really  

excited about these projects because they are a 
demonstration of our push and dedication to take  

new paths. However, this is where the competition 
between regulatory systems comes into play.  

In Germany and Europe, we ask ourselves, will we 
be able to get these projects working with all  

the existing approval and planning processes? 
And will we get the green power to our industrial  

sites? If you look at Germany, right now a 
single approval procedure for a wind farm,  

and it was mentioned this morning, can take up 
to 7 years. It might be even 10 years. Parts of  

Germany are still only at an early planning 
stage. If you look at China in comparison,  

the Energy Bureau and authorities implemented the 
renewable direct power purchase mechanism in 2021.  

One and a half years after the need for 
industry to make use of PPAs become clear.  

This allows us access to 100% renewable 
energy supply for our new site in China.  

This means also for Europe and Germany significant 
acceleration of planning of the approval processes  

is an absolute must. For Europe there is another 
challenge. Capacity expansion for generation  

and transportation, not only for renewable 
electricity but also climate?friendly hydrogen  

needs to be done across countries. Not only 
within the scope of one dedicated country. 
 

This can be the game?changer because it will 
unlock the full potential of different countries  

and regions and speed up our race against climate 
change. And it will strengthen the much?needed  

competitiveness of Europe's industry. On the next 
slide, please, you see all these new technologies  

are not economical at this point. For this, the 
higher cost from the new technologies will have to  

be borne by end consumers. End consumers right now 
are increasingly asking for CO2?neutral products.  

So many of our direct customers need 
to reduce their own carbon footprint.  

And in addition to making things more transparent, 
we are now in the position to calculate the  

product carbon footprint of all of our sales 
products. It's a total model, 45,000 of them.  

With this we are helping our customers to develop 
strategies to reduce their own carbon footprint of  

their products for their end consumers. 
We expect the demand for Net Zero and low  

PCF products will exceed supply in the medium 
term. This is why we want to be among the first  

companies to offer Net Zero products at scale. 
This will enable us to establish new business  

models. So now my last slide, what do we need 
to do to be even quicker and more efficient  

with the transformation? We need new alliances 
and a new way of collaboration across industry,  

politics, and society. In Germany, across Europe, 
and globally. As much as we invest and as hard as  

we try at BASF, the transformation is a task 
that can only be accomplished in alliances,  

especially businesses and governments 
need to work together much closer. 
 

What we need is a smart alliance of technology and 
regulation. We need a framework that strengthens  

the competitive industry and enables business 
opportunities. Because industry in all regions  

needs to work on a level playing field which is 
not distorted by unfair advantages somewhere else.  

Only then can businesses deliver the 
required solutions at the lowest cost  

for the respective societies. Above all, this 
means a predictable climate and energy policy  

that encourages regional industrial 
transformation without hampering global trade. 
 

This is why we prefer improving conditions 
for new production method, not establishing  

adjustment measures everywhere. We also need to 
speed up innovation by incentivizing large?scale  

investment in climate?friendly technologies in a 
technology?open way. Funding programmes and new  

instruments like the planned Carbon Conference 
For Difference are decisive for this.  

It will serve the companies' 
end and transformation globally.  

We need regulation with the goal of drastically 
increasing the supply of renewable energy.  

To be concrete, the removal of existing burdens 
like policy?induced costs. And I'm happy to see  

how determined the current German government 
is to proceed with abolishing the EG Levy. 
 

The importance of infrastructure I already 
mentioned. This is crucial for all of our  

production sites worldwide. This includes 
renewable energy sources like electricity.  

It includes hydrogen but also CO2 because 
we will also need to further work on carbon  

capture use and the storage of carbon, 
CO2. So with this, ladies and gentlemen,  

when I said the challenge is huge, I did not want 
to create the impression that it's not manageable.  

On the contrary, we have everything it takes. The 
technologies will progress. The key measures are  

known. The determination is there. So now 
we need to turn the ambition into action.  

And that's the theme of today's event. 
So BASF is committed to this transformation  

and I'm optimistic that together we can succeed. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 


